1

Structure-from-Sherds++: Robust Incremental 3D
Reassembly of Axially Symmetric Pots from
Unordered and Mixed Fragment Collections

arXiv:2502.13986v1 [eess.IV] 19 Feb 2025

Seong Jong Yoo, Student Member, IEEE, Sisung Liu, Student Member, IEEE, Muhammad Zeeshan Arshad,
Jinhyeok Kim, Young Min Kim, Yiannis Aloimonos, Cornelia Fermüller, Kyungdon Joo, Jinwook Kim, and Je
Hyeong Hong, Member, IEEE,

Abstract—Reassembling multiple axially symmetric pots from
fragmentary sherds is crucial for cultural heritage preservation,
yet it poses significant challenges due to thin and sharp fracture
surfaces that generate numerous false positive matches and hinder
large-scale puzzle solving. Existing global approaches, which
optimize all potential fragment pairs simultaneously or datadriven models, are prone to local minima and face scalability
issues when multiple pots are intermixed. Motivated by Structurefrom-Motion (SfM) for 3D reconstruction from multiple images,
we propose an efficient reassembly method for axially symmetric
pots based on iterative registration of one sherd at a time,
called Structure-from-Sherds++ (SfS++). Our method extends
beyond simple replication of incremental SfM and leverages multigraph beam search to explore multiple registration paths. This
allows us to effectively filter out indistinguishable false matches
and simultaneously reconstruct multiple pots without requiring
prior information such as base or the number of mixed objects.
Our approach achieves 87% reassembly accuracy on a dataset
of 142 real fragments from 10 different pots, outperforming
other methods in handling complex fracture patterns with mixed
datasets and achieving state-of-the-art performance. Code and
results can be found in our project page https://sj-yoo.info/sfs/.
Index Terms—Structure-from-Motion, cultural heritage, computer methods in archaeology, 3D puzzling, robust optimization

I. I NTRODUCTION

R

ESTORING ancient ceramic pots is essential for understanding human history, including insights into past
lifestyles [5], and economies [17]. However, they are often
unearthed as fragmented pieces, or sherds, dispersed across

Manuscript received xxx xx, 20xx.
S.J. Yoo, Y. Aloimonos, and C. Fermüller are with the Department of
Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA.
S. Liu is with the Department of Artificial Intelligence, Hanyang
University, South Korea.
M.Z. Arshad is with the Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Ottawa,
ON, Canada.
J.H. Kim is with with the Artificial Intelligence Graduate School, UNIST,
South Korea.
Y.M. Kim is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Seoul National University, South Korea.
J.W. Kim is with the Intelligence and Interaction Research Center, Korea
Institute of Science and Technology, South Korea.
K. Joo is with the Artificial Intelligence Graduate School and the
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, UNIST, South Korea.
J.H. Hong is with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Hanyang
University, South Korea.
Seong Jong Yoo and Sisung Liu contributed equally to this work.
Correspondence to J.W. Kim (jinwook.kim21@gmail.com) and J.H. Hong
(jhh37@hanyang.ac.kr).

Pot A

Pot A

Pot B

Pot C

Pot D

Pot E

Pot F

Pot G

Pot H

Pot I

Pot J

Fig. 1. An illustration of 10 real pots simultaneously reassembled from 142
unclustered sherds (3D point clouds) using the proposed SfS++ method. The
dataset includes two pairs of identical but different broken potteries —Pot (E,
I) and Pot (C, J). SfS++ successfully reassembled the mixed 10 potteries with
87% accuracy, as displayed in this figure.

excavation sites, intermingled with other artifacts, and degraded
over time. Consequently, pottery restoration requires multiple
complex processes to recover valuable historical records.
Despite significant efforts by restoration experts—who are
equipped with knowledge of geometric features and historical
context—reconstructing even a single pot can take days of
meticulous work. This challenge is compounded when multiple
axially symmetric pots are intermixed. Pieces from different
pots can be indistinguishable at first glance, making the trialand-error approach time-consuming and risky, as repeated
handling can cause undesired abrasions on the fracture surfaces.
These difficulties underscore the importance of developing an
efficient framework capable of virtually reassembling multiple
pots at once [3, 42].
Over the past decades, research in pottery restoration has
generally advanced along two primary paths: optimizationbased global methods and data-driven approaches (see Table I).
Optimization-based global methods [34, 25, 14] typically follow
a three-stage process. First, extracting features from each pot
sherd; second, identifying potential matches between each pair
of sherds; and last, solving global combinatorial optimization
to determine the most likely 3D pot configuration. This final
step simultaneously evaluates all edges in the global sherds
configuration graph, allowing the identification of true positive
matches. Meanwhile, data-driven approaches [15, 22, 39] treat

2

Original

False cycle 1

False cycle 2

Reordered sherd ID
5

6
1

7

2

4
8

(a)

Global method
(w/o false positive matches)

Global method

Ours
(incremental with beam search)

Fig. 2. Failure cases of optimization-based global method (re-implementation
of Son et al. [34]). The top row shows some exemplary false positive loops
formed in pot A from Fig 1. (True configurations in green and false in red).
Some pairwise matches are difficult to detect even at the cycle level just by
looking at the edge lines and the axis profile curve (in white). The global
method only succeeds when false positive matches are removed. On the other
hand, our incremental method with beam search outputs the correct result
despite false matches.

(b)

Reordered sherd ID

3

A
B
C
D
E

(c)

Fig. 3. Challenges in reassembling multiple axially symmetric pots. (a) Sharp,
thin fracture surfaces with little distinct features often lead to false positive
sherd matches. (b)Within a single pot (e.g. Pot A), only physically adjacent
sherd pairs are truly connected, resulting in a sparse connectivity graph with
only 59% valid connections among eight sherds. (c) The noisy block-diagonal
sparsity structure when sherds from different pots are mixed, as discussed in
Sec. III-A. Only diagonal components are effective (colored rectangles) and
otherwise are considered as false positives (black dots).

for reassembling axially symmetric pots from fragments. Our
approach not only adopts the incremental concept but also
introduces features tailored to pot reassembly, enhancing
algorithm’s robustness. Key component, called BAISER (BaseAgnostic Incremental ShErd Registration) module, includes
the use of beam search to address indistinguishable false
pottery restoration as a 3D puzzle assembly task, using deep
matches and multi-graph expansions to enable the simultaneous
learning models trained on large datasets to learn fragment
reconstruction of multiple pots. As a result, we achieve the first
features and matching strategies.
successful simultaneous reassembly of ten mixed, unordered
However, both approaches face notable limitations, particpotteries, as demonstrated in Fig. 1. The key contributions of
ularly in handling false positive matches. In optimizationour work are:
based global approaches, these errors propagate through the
reconstruction, as each sherd’s placement relies on these
+ a new SfM-inspired pipeline for simultaneous reassembly
matches. Similarly, data-driven approaches struggle with false
of multiple potteries from 3D scans of ceramic fragments,
positives due to the challenging nature of discriminating
+ design of individual modules such as the axis-based
between similar fracture patterns, even when extensive training
edge line descriptor, mesh processing pipeline, and multidata is available. These false positives are fundamentally
geometric verification using rim, profile curve, and thickinevitable due to the lack of distinctive features on sharply
ness to reduce false positive matches prevalent in the task
broken fracture surfaces (see Fig. 3(a)).
of reassembling multiple potteries,
Another key challenge stems from the fundamental con+ an approach called base-agnostic incremental sherd regisnectivity limitations among pottery sherds: each valid pair
tration (BAISER) that goes beyond replicating incremental
must be physically adjacent, resulting in a sparse connectivity
SfM and leverages multi-graph beam search with graph
graph for each pot (Fig. 3(b)). When multiple pots are
merging tailored for reconstruction of multiple pots from
mixed, the overall connectivity graph typically splits into
unordered and mixed fragments, and
block-diagonal subgraphs—each block corresponding to a
+ extensive experimental evaluations on our publiclydifferent pot—and remains noisy with numerous false positive
released dataset of 142 real fragments from 10 different
matches (Fig. 3(c)). The aforementioned issues become more
pots and the public benchmark called Breaking Bad [33],
problematic as the number of sherds increases, leading to an
comparing against other state-of-the-art methods.
exponential rise in false positive pairs. Furthermore, existing
This work extends our previous conference paper on
approaches often assume a single-object input, which not only
imposes a classification burden on other architectures but also Structure-from-Sherds (SfS) [9]. We addressed the issue that
compromises reconstruction robustness in noisy scenario, such prior work heavily relies on the accuracy of base assembly,
leading to complete reconstruction failure when the base
as when sherds from different pots are included.
Recognizing these limitations, we turn our attention to assembly is inaccurate, by introducing a robust multi-graph
Structure-from-Motion (SfM), which has achieved tremendous beam search with graph merging that enables reconstruction
success in reconstructing large-scale 3D scenes from thousands without depending on the base. We also improved the mesh
of images. The core of SfM’s success lies in its incremental processing pipeline to enhance surface extraction accuracy. For
approach, which iteratively registers new camera views, refines experimental validation, we further expanded our dataset from
pairwise matches, and robustly discovers initially undetected 80 sherds of 5 different pots to 142 sherds from 10 different
pots. Additionally, we have evaluated SfS++ not only on our
correspondences while reducing false positives.
Inspired by above insights, we propose an optimization- dataset but also on the Breaking Bad synthetic dataset [33],
based Structure-from-Sherds++ (SfS++), specifically designed comparing it against other learning-based SoTA methods.

3

TABLE I
C OMPARISON OF REPRESENTATIVE 3D FRAGMENT REASSEMBLY APPROACHES . W HILE SEVERAL METHODS ARE SPECIALIZED FOR POTTERY RESTORATION ,
OTHERS TARGET MORE GENERAL 3D PUZZLE TASKS .
Approach

Optimization
(Incremental)

Optimization
(Global)

Models

Real dataset

Multi-object

Willis & Cooper [41]

✓

x

Huang et al. [11]

✓

x

Jia et al. [12]

✓

x

Son et al. [34]

✓

x

Zhang et al. [46]

✓

x

Wang et al. [37]

✓

x

Huang et al. [10]

x

x

RGL-NET [6]

x

x

Jigsaw [22]

x

x

PuzzleFusion++ [39]

x

x

Data-driven

Hybrid
Optimization
(Incremental)

FRASIER [15]

x

x

SfS (ours) [9]

✓

✓

SfS++ (ours)

✓

✓

Key characteristics
• Extraction of T-junctions
• Matching of edge lines, normals, and profiles
• Matching of break-surface features
• Penetration-free local alignment
• Keypoint-based multi-scale descriptor
• Robust pairwise matching with RANSAC
• Estimation of symmetry axes
• Matching of broken curves
• Template guidance for initial matching
• Matching of fracture regions
• Probabilistic reassembly framework
• 2D/3D descriptor with global constraints
• Recurrent, dynamic graph learning for pose refinement
• Part aggregation for geometrically-equivalent shapes
• Recurrent graph learning
• Progressive part assembly
• Hierarchical feature extraction with PointNet++
• Joint learning of segmentation and matching
• Diffusion model for alignment
• Transformer for verification
• PointNext + GeoTransformer
• Beam search
• Axis-based edge line descriptor
• Multi-root beam search (base)
• Axis-based edge line descriptor
• Base-agnostic multi-graph beam search

II. R ELATED W ORK
A. Geometric optimization
The virtual reassembly of archaeological pottery has garnered
significant attention in computer vision and graphics over the
past two decades [24, 11, 41, 34, 46]. Early research focused
on extracting geometric properties, such as the axis of symmetry [26, 1, 23] or profile curve [40, 13], from individual sherds
of axially symmetric pots. McBride and Kimia [24] introduced
a method for matching fragment curves via their corners, and
Li et al. [19] proposed features incorporating boundary curves
and concave-convex patches for pairwise fragment comparison.
However, these efforts primarily addressed pairwise matching
rather than complete puzzle solving.
Unlike these initial studies that focused on individual
or pairwise fragment comparison, Willis and Cooper [41]
pioneered a reassembly pipeline for axially symmetric pots,
using an incremental registration approach akin to ours. At each
step, the best candidate sherd is selected based on factors such
as its matching degree of edge line points, the corresponding
surface normals, and the axis profile curve. However, their
reliance on manually extracted T-junctions and the lack of a
backtracking mechanism, coupled with validation on only a
single 10-sherd pot, limited its applicability.
In later years, Son et al. [34] presented a global approach
to the reassembly problem, applying it to 48 fragments from
3 pots. Their method considers all potential pairwise matches
across all pot sherds and solves the combinatorial optimization
problem of finding true positive fragment pairs to retrieve
the 3D pot model directly. This is achieved by minimizing
algebraic costs to ensure consistency in the axis of symmetry
and the profile curve, using a spectral method [18]. Although
this approach demonstrated state-of-the-art performance, its
handling of false positive matches remains unclear —they are
sometimes indistinguishable from ground truth [41], which can
be detrimental for global approaches as shown in Fig. 2.
Other studies include the work of Huang et al. [11], which
proposes an incremental method for reassembling geometric

Limitations
• Requires the assumption of axial symmetry
• Absence of backtracking
• Reliance on feature-rich fracture surfaces
• Reliance on pairwise matching
• Potential failure of keypoints on flat or noisy surfaces
• Requires the assumption of axial symmetry
• Limited handling of false positives in a global approach
• Requirement of pre-existing templates
• Reduced effectiveness with significantly different templates
• Reliance on distinctive fracture surfaces
• Requirement of accurate fracture-region segmentation

• Requirement of large amount of dataset
• Limited performance on real-world objects
• Sensitivity to false positive matches

• Requires the assumption of axial symmetry
• Reliance on base pieces
• Requires the assumption of axial symmetry

objects. However, this method relies on the existence of rich,
unique features on the fracture surface, which is often not
observed in pot sherds (see Fig. 3 (a)), and has only been
tested for single object reassembly. Zhang et al. [46] presented
a template-based matching technique, which is also limited to
single objects and known pot templates.

B. Data-driven approaches
Unlike classical approaches, data-driven approaches leveraged recent developments in deep learning and large
datasets [33, 16, 36]. For example, Huang et al. [10] and Harish
et al. [6] extracted fragment features using PointNet [27] and
generated a connectivity graph. They then used a recurrent
model or graph neural network to find the pose of each input
fragment from this graph. Similarly, Liu et al. [20] devised an
attention-based feature encoder and two decoders to estimate
transformation and boundary points for pairwise matching,
assembling multiple pieces through iterative greedy search.
Recently, Jigsaw [22] is a framework that leverages attentionbased feature extraction and jointly learns segmentation and
matching to assemble fractured 3D objects. Meanwhile, Kim
et al. [15] introduced FRASIER, which used PointNext [28]
for point cloud segmentation and GeoTransformer [29] for
iterative registration, combined with a beam search strategy [9].
Furthermore, Wang et al. [39] proposed PuzzleFusion++,
an auto-agglomerative end-to-end neural network system that
employed a diffusion model for predicting 6-DoF alignment
parameters with a transformer for verifying alignments.
Despite their impressive results on the Breaking Bad
dataset [33], these methods have limitations when applied
to archaeological pottery. The broken objects in the Breaking
bad often differed from the typically sharp and small fracture
regions found in real-world broken ceramic sherds. Moreover,
most approaches focused on single object reconstruction [2],
leaving their efficacy in multi-object scenarios unverified.

4

TABLE II
A LIST OF ANALOGIES FORMED BETWEEN AN INCREMENTAL S TRUCTURE - FROM -M OTION PIPELINE [32] AND POT REASSEMBLY METHOD .

Input
Outputs
Extracted features
Pairwise matching criteria
Geometric verification
Sanity check
Registered quantity
Triangulated model
Joint estimation

Structure-from-motion (SfM)
RGB images
camera poses & sparse 3D scene
SIFT [21] keypoints
SIFT feature distance
inliers from fundamental (or essential)
matrix or homography estimation
cheirality constraint
camera views
3D scene points
bundle adjustment

III. M OTIVATION
A. Review of problem characteristics
As discussed in Sec. I, reassembling axially symmetric pots
presents unique challenges compared to other 3D reconstruction
tasks, primarily due to the characteristics of broken pottery
sherds. The primary challenges are outlined below:
Existence of numerous false positive matches. Fig. 3
(a) shows the fracture surface (often used for matching [11,
46, 20]) is thin and sharply broken for ceramic pots. It is,
therefore, difficult to detect features and distinguish between
edge lines, leading to an increase in false positive matches,
especially when identical ceramic pots (pairs of C-J and E-I
pots) are mixed together.
Complex pot sherds connectivity. Reassembling fragmented pots involves sparse intra-pot connectivity, as each pair
of sherds must be physically adjacent, leading to a limited
number of valid edges in the pot’s connectivity graph. For
instance, a connectivity graph of Pot A exhibits only 59%
complete as shown in Fig. 3(b). Moreover, when multiple pots
are intermixed, the connectivity graph typically becomes blockdiagonal due to fragments from different pots, yet it remains
noisy with numerous false positive matches (Fig. 3(c)).
B. Leveraging incremental Structure-from-Motion for axially
symmetric pot reassembly
Considering the challenges outlined in Sec. III-A, this study
looks to the Structure-from-Motion (SfM) methodology widely
used in 3D scene reconstruction for a potential solution.
SfM’s success, particularly its incremental approach, offers
a promising avenue for mitigating the false positive match
problem and gradually resolving the complex connectivity
in pot reassembly. The section compares the pot reassembly
problem with SfM and discusses adapting SfM principles to
develop the SfS++ methodology.
Problem analogy. SfM is a multi-stage process that jointly
estimates 3D scene points and camera poses from a set of input
images. Similarly, pot reassembly involves jointly estimating
a 3D pot model (defined by its axis of symmetry and profile
curve) while determining the transformations of individual
sherds from 3D point cloud data. In both cases, the task can
be framed as solving an optimization problem on a sparsely
connected graph (see Fig. 3(c)).

Pot reassembly
3D point cloud of pot sherds
sherd poses & axially symmetric pot models
axis, edge line descriptor, rim, thickness, base
weighted sum of above features
inliers from iterative closest point (ICP)
overlap, thickness & profile curve constraints
sherds
3D pot model (axis of symmetry & profile curve)
global sherd and axis alignment via ICP

Procedural similarities. SfM and pottery reconstruction
methods share procedural similarities. In incremental SfM,
features are first extracted from each image, and pairwise
matches are established. Then, the reconstruction is built up
incrementally by adding one view at a time, refining previous
matches and discovering new ones. At each step, camera
positions and 3D points are updated incrementally as new
views are added, while bundle adjustment iteratively refines
both camera parameters and the 3D structure. Likewise, Son et
al. [34] proposed a pot reassembly method that extracts axisand edge line-based features from each fragment, identifies
pairwise matches, and employs a global optimization for pottery
reconstruction. However, because this approach is closer to
a global SfM strategy, any undetected false matches can
propagate errors throughout the entire assembly (see Fig. 2).
Empirical differences. As shown in Fig. 2, the pottery
reassembly problem encounters a significant challenge with
false positive matches that are difficult to differentiate from true
matches, even upon human visual inspection. It is impossible
to remove all the incorrect pairs using false cycle filtering
techniques similar to the work proposed by Zach et al. [45].
Furthermore, while SfM typically constructs a single unified
scene, pottery reconstruction often requires working with
multiple separate models.
The procedural similarities between SfM and axially symmetric pottery reassembly in feature extraction, matching, and
optimization processes (see Table II) suggest the potential
applicability of established SfM methodologies to pottery
reconstruction. However, pottery reassembly presents unique
challenges, such as distinguishing false positive matches and
handling multiple objects, as shown in Fig. 3. This underscores
the need for a modified approach addressing these domainspecific issues rather than directly applying SfM.
C. Why optimization-based method in the deep learning era?
Recently, deep learning-based methods have been actively
researched for SfM [38, 4]. While showing progress in solving
complex geometric problems with a data-driven approach, these
methods face limitations in generalization, making it difficult to
completely replace SfM with deep learning. As these limitations
also apply to pottery reassembly, we argue for the necessity of
optimization-based methods for pottery reconstruction, despite
the increasing focus on data-driven deep learning methods.

5

Feature
Feature
Extraction
Extraction
(FE) (FE)
Pairwise
Pairwise
Matching
Matching
(PM) (PM)

OutputOutput
Exploring
Exploring
Candidates
Candidates

●●●

!$

!$!
●●●

!$%

!$%

●●●

●●●

!$!
●●●

State !$

Exploring
Exploring
Candidates
Candidates

!#%

●●●

● ● ●

● ● ●

!#%

!$

!$

●●●

●●●

State !#

!#

!$&%

!$&%

Iterative
Iterative
steps steps
State State
Expansion
Expansion

(a) Overall pipeline

Iteration termination on end condition

!!#

!!

Iteration termination on end condition

!!#

!!

●●●

!!!

●●●

Priority
State
!$
Candidates

!$

!!!

State !!

!#

●●●

Priority
Sherd
Candidates
registration

Sherd
State
!$
registration

State !! State !!

Priority
State
!#
Candidates

●●●

State !$

Initial state
Initial
(!"! )state (!"! )

Priority
State
!!
Candidates

Priority
Sherd
Candidates
registration

Selection of
Selection
sherds
ofwith
sherds with
the mosthe
pairs
most pairs

Geometric
Geometric
descriptor
descriptor

Priority
Sherd
Candidates
registration

State !#

Sherd
State
!#
registration

Axis estimation
Axis estimation

State !!

Geometric
Geometric
verification
verification
Data
preprocessing
Data
preprocessing

Sherd
State
!!
registration

Match pairs
Match pairs
refinement
refinement

Base-agnostic
Base-agnostic
incremental
incremental
sherd sherd
registration
registration
(BAISER)
(BAISER)
(Sort & (Sort
select&top
select
") top ")

PairwisePairwise
descriptor
descriptor
matching
matching

Recompute axisRecompute axis- LCS Pairwise
LCS Pairwise
base descriptor
base descriptor
matchingmatching

Geometric
Geometric
Sherd registration
Sherd registration
verification
verification

Candidates list
Candidates list End condition
End condition
generation
generation
check
check

State State
Expansion
Expansion
Global sherd
Global sherd
adjustment
adjustment

Geometric
Geometric
verification
verification

End condition
End condition Global Global
reassembly
reassembly
check
check
score
computation
score
computation

(b) BAISER submodules

Fig. 4. (a) Overall pipeline: The SfS++ pipeline consists of three modules: Feature Extraction (FE module, Sec. IV-B), Pairwise Matching (PM module,
Sec. IV-C), and iterative Base-Agnostic Incremental ShErd Registration (BAISER module, Sec. IV-D). (b) BAISER submodules: The BAISER module utilizes
a multi-graph beam search algorithm, which iteratively repeats two components: Exploring candidates for expansion (Sec. IV-D3) and State expansion
(Sec. IV-D4). In the State Expansion components, the red dotted line represents graph merging.

First, as mentioned earlier, thin and sharply fractured pottery
surfaces often lack distinct features, resulting in frequent false
positive matches. While deep learning approaches attempt to
learn robust fragment features from large datasets, they still
struggle with highly similar break surfaces and often violate
geometric constraints. In contrast, an incremental optimization
framework can systematically validates the geometric fit as new
fragments are added. By discarding uncertain matches early in
the process, it effectively reduces the false positives. Second,
multi-pot reconstruction presents a significant challenge for
data-driven approaches, as it is difficult to determine whether
fragments belong to different pots solely based on break surface
features, as demonstrated in Table VIII and Fig. 15. To effectively address this challenge, the optimization-based method
is required that integrates an incremental approach with multigraph beam search. This combination allows for the exploration
of all possible fragment combinations, even when multiple pots
are mixed together. Last, acquiring large, meticulously labeled
training datasets for ancient pottery is often prohibitively
expensive and time-consuming, making data-driven methods
impractical in many archaeological contexts. By leveraging
explicit geometric rules and constraints, optimization-based approaches can achieve reliable reconstructions with significantly
less dependence on large dataset.
IV. P ROPOSED METHOD
A. Algorithm overview and notations

Incremental ShErd Registration (BAISER module) employs an
incremental exploration approach, expanding candidate paths
at each step while leveraging the multi-graph beam search
method, to reconstruct pots without prior knowledge of the
base (Sec. IV-D). This algorithm iteratively performs two key
components: Exploring candidates for expansion (Sec. IV-D3)
and State expansion (Sec. IV-D4).
These modules significantly enhance the algorithm’s ability
to robustly search possible matching configurations from noisy
pairwise matches, efficiently converging toward the correct
solution (see more details at Sec. V-E).
Notations.
We first define P sample as the point cloud
data uniformly sampled from the mesh representation. A point
ps ∈ P sample represents a point on the surface of a sherd in
3D space and the surface normal vector at that point is defined
as n̂s . For each of the surfaces, we extract an ordered line
of points around its boundary, referred to as the edge line.
The  i -th point on the edge line of sherd  A  is then defined as
A
A
qA
∈ R6 , where  \mathbf {p}^A_i \in \mathbb {R}^3  represents the position
i = pi , n̂i
of the point, and  \hat {\mathbf {n}}^A_i \in \mathbb {R}^3  represents its normal vector.
We denote ΩA = {i|qA
i ∈ A} as the set of the indices
corresponding to the point cloud data on the edge line of
sherd A. With a slight abuse of notation, we denote ΩAB =
B
{(i, j)|qA
i ∈ A, qj ∈ B} as the correspondence index set
between sherd A and sherd B. Lastly, we define Φ as the set of
sherds participating in the optimization problem. For example,
in a pairwise matching optimization problem, n(Φ) = 2, where
n(·) is the cardinality of the set.

Algorithm overview. Our proposed pipeline, SfS++, for
reassembling axially symmetric pots integrates findings from
Sec. III-B and improvements from our previous conference B. Feature extraction from individual sherds
The FE module extracts axis-based edge line descriptors
paper [9]. SfS++ consists of three main modules, as illustrated
for the initial pairwise matching candidates from the input
in Fig. 4.
First, the Feature Extraction module (FE module) extracts object mesh. Inspired by SfM, which extracts image features
distinctive features from individual sherds (Sec. IV-B). This to support matching and optimization, this module separates
process includes surface segmentation, edge line extraction, surfaces into interior and exterior regions, estimates edge lines
symmetric axis estimation, and axis-based feature extraction. from the interior surface, and extracts axis-based edge line
Second, the Pairwise Matching module (PM module) generates descriptors using parameters such as height, radius, angle, and
possible pairwise matching candidates using the Longest thickness relative to the axis of symmetry.
Common Subsequence (LCS) algorithm (Sec. IV-C). These can1) Data preprocessing: This section discusses the data
didates are further refined through Iterative Closest Point (ICP) preprocessing steps and the geometric feature descriptor. Firstly,
method and geometric validation. Finally, the Base-Agnostic we sample the point cloud data S from the mesh representation.

6

Axis of symmetry

𝜏𝜃 = 4

𝜏𝜃 = 8

𝜏𝜃 = 12 𝜏𝜃 = 16

𝑛ො

𝜏𝜅 = 1

𝜏𝜃 = 1

𝑝

(a) Results for different
τθ

(b) Decorative part
removal

(c) Surface
classification

Fig. 5. Segmentation results using the region growing algorithm in CGAL
[35]. Each color represents a distinct segmentation clusters. (a) Variation of
segmentation results across different τθ values. (b) Removal of non-smooth
decorative parts achieved with τθ = 4 and τκ = 1. (c) Classification of
interior and exterior surfaces based on the axis of symmetry.

Next, we segment the surfaces into inner and outer regions.
From the inner surface, we compute the axis of symmetry and
extract the edge line, which provides a concise representation of
the sherd. Finally, we compute the geometric features required
for further analysis. Compared to the previous work [9], we
introduce cluster merging to ensure robust surface segmentation.
Interior and exterior surface extraction. To segment
the point cloud into exterior and interior surfaces, we use the
region growing algorithm [35]. This algorithm starts from the
point with the minimum curvature and expands by combining
the nb = 10 neighboring points that have a curvature value of
less than τκ and a normal angle less than τθ with the point’s
normal. We set the values of τθ =4 and τκ =1 to achieve clear
separation of interior, exterior, and fractured surfaces.
Cluster merging. Following the initial segmentation, we
apply a cluster merging algorithm to improve the results. This
process starts by identifying close point pairs between clusters
using the k-nearest neighbors method. We then calculate
average normal vectors for local patches around these pairs
to check for normal similarity and compute and compare the
average curvature of boundary points for each cluster pair.
Additionally, internal points from each cluster are selected
to further verify normal and curvature similarities. Clusters
satisfying all these criteria are merged, and the process repeats
until no further merges are possible. This approach effectively
combines parts of the same surface that were excessively
separated in the initial segmentation. Further details can be
found in the supplementary material [43].
Subsequently, B-Spline fitting is performed for each cluster to
refine surface boundaries and uniformly sample the point cloud.
Finally, we select the two largest clusters, representing the inner
and outer surfaces. Note that region-growing algorithm and
clustering naturally facilitate the separation of decorative parts,
such as the nose and handle. The effect of τθ and subsequent
part removal results are shown in Fig. 5 (a) and (b).
Interior and exterior surface classification. To determine
whether the selected surfaces are interior or exterior, we
leverage geometric characteristic of axially-symmetric pots.
Specifically, for each point ps ∈ P sample on the surface, we
project a ray along its surface normal direction n̂s towards
the axis of symmetry and define the point ps ′ ∈ R3 where
it meets the axis of symmetry. Next, we assess whether the
direction of the (near-)intersection point ps ′ is in the positive
or negative surface normal direction of the point ps . If the
point ps ′ lies on the positive surface normal, the surface to

Fig. 6. Improved edge line detection on 3D object meshes. B-Spline fitting
method (red) extracts edge lines closer to the real edge line, demonstrating
enhanced accuracy over a wider area compared to the previous approach (blue)

which  p_s  belongs is classified as the interior surface. On the
other hand, if ps lies in the negative direction, the surface is
classified as the exterior surface, as depicted in Fig. 5 (c).
We test two configurations: one surface as interior and the
other as exterior, and vice versa, and we select the configuration
that had the greatest number of surface points from both
surfaces that satisfied the above geometry (by checking the
sign of the ray’s normal scalar coefficient).
Edge line extraction and segmentation. The interior
surface point cloud boundary makes up the edge line extracted
using the point cloud boundary-estimation method from the
PCL library [30]. The extracted edge line is refined through
B-spline surface fitting, which smooths the edge line and
calculates normals for each point. Using a K-D tree-based
search, points near the edge line are identified and filtered to
remove noise and outliers. The filtered points are resampled to
generate equidistant points with a point-to-point distance of d
= 1.9mm, an empirically optimized value. The resulting edge
line points are reordered counter-clockwise using their normals
and a voting algorithm, as visualized in Fig. 6. Finally, we
segment the edge line based on corners detected by analyzing
peaks in the distribution of distance scores, which measure the
deviation of each point from its local linear trend.
2) Axis-of-symmetry estimation: Due to the axial symmetry
of pottery, the axis estimation is a crucial step in pottery
reconstruction. Existing algorithms [1, 23, 34] offer high
computational efficiency but suffer from limitations such as
consideration of only one surface [1], or neglect of normal
information, leading to a bias towards cylindrical shapes [34].
In contrast, PotSAC [7] achieves state-of-the-art performance
by robustly estimating symmetry axes from noisy 3D fragment
point clouds using both exterior and interior surface information. It initially estimates the axis by combining MLESACbased sampling with a minimal 6-point solver that enforces
Pottmann’s constraint—ensuring the offset vector, symmetry
axis direction, and the cross product of the surface normal lie on
the same plane. Subsequently, PotSAC utilizes an extended Cao
and Mumford error, applicable to both interior and exterior
surfaces [7], in the subsequent trust-region-based nonlinear
optimization, enabling high-precision estimation even under
challenging conditions. However, since the original PotSAC
outputs only a single axis even for ambiguous fragments, we
propose a modified version capable of producing multiple axes.
Instead of selecting a single final axis in the MLESAC stage,
the modified method selects the top 10 candidate axes. Then,
the angles between each pair of axes are evaluated, and those

7

2

2

𝒓𝚫𝜶

0

𝒕

y axis
𝜶
𝒓
x axis

Ω!"#

𝑷𝑨𝟐

●

Ω$"#

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

𝑷𝑩
𝒏#𝟏

●

●
●

●
●

●

Ω!"#
●

𝑷𝑩
𝒏

●
●

●

Cluster 2

Cluster 1

-2
10
8
6

Top view

⋯

-2

Side view

Ω$"#

𝚫𝐫

0

Sherd A

xy-plane

Sherd B
⋯

𝑷𝑩
𝟐

𝑷𝑨𝟏

-2
2

𝒉

𝑷𝑨𝒎 𝑷𝑨𝒎#𝟏

z axis

𝑷𝑩
𝟏

𝚫𝐡

0

0

100

Points

Unfiltered
SG-filtered
300
200

𝒕

Fig. 7. Illustration of our axis-based edge line descriptor. Unfiltered results
are computed via the finite difference method. The Savitzky-Golay filter [31]
is used for smoothing and differentiation, followed by Gaussian filtering with
a kernel of width 7 and σ=2.0. Thickness (t) is not filtered, as it is missing
in some edge points.

Fig. 8. A conceptual diagram of pairwise feature matching. Our LCS matching
scheme (above) detects multiple correspondence pairs (e.g. ΩAB
(green) and
1
ΩAB
(blue)) of potential matches between two sherds. However, only a few
2
of these are true matches (e.g. (1-3) and (1-4) pairs in the bottom figure).

(t), this descriptor comprehensively characterizes the edge line.
This approach captures all geometric variations associated with
each edge line, eliminating the need to refer back to the original
point cloud (as seen in [34]).
Descriptor definition. Our axis-based descriptor for point
qj = (pj , nj ) ∈ R6 on the edge line is defined as

with an angle of 10 degrees or less are considered duplicates,
with the axis having the higher cost, defined as the robustified
residual error, being removed through pruning. To improve
efficiency, we initially sample only 10% of the surface points
to generate axis candidates, and after pruning, all surface points
  [\Delta h(\v q_j), \Delta r(\v q_j), r \Delta \alpha (\v q_j), t(\v q_j)]\tr
(1)
are used for more detailed refinement of the remaining axes.
Rim detection.
To identify the rim of pottery sherds, where ∆ involves finite differentiation. Because of noise along
we analyze the 3D coordinate information of the sherd edges, the edge lines, naive differentiation technique, such as finite
known as edge lines. The rim generally exhibits a flat and differences, yields noisy features. To mitigate noise along the
consistent curve in terms of height and radius and transitions edge lines, we apply the Savitzky-Golay digital differentiator
smoothly into the surrounding sections, unlike irregularity of (S-G method) [31] using 7 points and a Gaussian filter with
a break surface. Based on these characteristics, we identify  \sigma = 2.0 . The radius  r  is multiplied by  \Delta \alpha  to obtain the
rim candidates using the following criteria: First, we evaluate geometric tangential distance.
the consistency of height and radius, seeking sections with
To compute thickness  t , a ray is projected in the opposite
minimal variation, specifically where the standard deviation of direction along the surface normal from each point p on
in
both height and radius is 1.0 mm or less. Second, rim sections the inner edge line to find the closest point p on the outer
out
must exhibit gradual changes, defined as an average variation surface. The point must satisfy: (a) its distance from the ray is
of 0.1 mm or less in both height and radius between adjacent within 1 mm, and (b) the direction of (p − p ) is opposite
in
out
points. Last, to minimize false positives in short edge segments, to n̂pin .  t  is calculated as the distance between p and p .
in
out
we only consider sections composed of at least 20 points that
meet the previous criteria. Edge line sections satisfying these
criteria are designated as rim candidates. If multiple candidates C. Pairwise matching
are identified, the section with the most stable and consistent
Incremental SfM reconstructs 3D structures through deheight and radius is selected as the final rim.
scriptor matching, RANSAC-based geometric verification, and
3) Axis-based edge line descriptor: While Son et al. [34] iterative refinement. Similarly, our three-step Pairwise Matching
have used the axis of symmetry as a constraint to identify (PM) module uses axis-based edge line descriptors extracted
incorrect pairwise matching, we go a step further by incorpo- along the edge lines to perform matching via the Longest
rating information about the axis to design an axis-based edge Common Subsequence (LCS) algorithm, achieving robust
line descriptor, enhancing the pair-wise matching efficiency.
alignments akin to SfM’s feature matching. Matches are further
Motivation. Traditional SfM finds correspondences by refined via ICP and physical constraints, in similar spirit to
extracting features like SIFT [21] from images. However, in the SfM’s geometric verification to ensure precision.
our case, the fractured surfaces of sherds are extremely thin and
1) Pairwise descriptor matching: To establish the initial
sharply broken, making it very difficult to extract distinctive pairwise matching between edge lines, we employ the LCS
features, as mentioned in Sec. III-A.
algorithm [8]. Upon running the algorithm, we obtain multiple
To address this, we observe that edge lines of neighboring clusters, referred to as correspondence of sequence of points on
sherds ideally converge into a congruent geometric shape along the edge line, representing the potential regions of alignment
with the axis of symmetry. To make use of this observation, between the matched sherds, as illustrated in Fig. 8.
we create a feature descriptor with the height (h), radius (r),
Handling sign ambiguity and rim constraints.
We
and angle (α) relative to the axis of the symmetry coordinate encounter sign ambiguity stemming from the direction of the
system, as illustrated in Fig. 7. Together with the thickness symmetric axis. To address this, we perform two rounds of

8

(a) Point-to-point
distance

(b) Point-to-point
normal

(c) Point-to-point
(distance + normal)

(d) Point-to-line

Fig. 9. Pairwise ICP results based on different cost functions are as follows:
Point-to-point ICP (c) provides a proper initial position, and point-to-line ICP
serves as fine-tuning (d). It is important to note that if we use only distance
(a) or normal (b), ICP consistently fails.

(a) 3D edge line overlap test

(b) Axis profile curve check

Fig. 10. Geometric verification filters two cases: (a) physically unrealistic
overlaps between sherds, and (b) non-smooth profile curves.

Second, to incorporate additional intra-sherd constraints,
matching for each pair of edge lines by inverting the descriptor
of one edge line. Furthermore, if the matched interval contains such as axis alignment or rim consistency, we define
a rim segment, we determine the match is false and discard it.
  J_{I}(A) := \mu \!\!\sum _{i\in \Omega ^{A}}\!\!\rho _{f}\big (f_{i}^{2}(\m T^A)\big ) + \nu \!\!\sum _{i\in \Psi ^{A}}\!\!\rho _{g}\big (g_{i}^{2}(\m T^A,r^{\mathrm {rim}},h^\mathrm {\mathrm {rim}})\big ) \eqlabel {eq:J_I}
2) Adjustment of matched sherds: While the above descriptor provides useful cues for finding initial correspondences,
(3)
it is difficult to perfectly distinguish true matches from false
matches, even with human inspection. Therefore, we adopt a where \Omega ^A is the set of points used for axis alignment in sherd
two-step verification process. First, we run the Iterative Closest A, and \Psi ^A indicates the set of rim segments from the set of
Point (ICP) on the initial pairs of edge lines. The ICP algorithm sherds A. The term f_i represents a function guiding the sherd
comprises two stages: correspondence assignment followed to align with the overall axis proposed in Eq. (9) of [7], while
by correspondence optimization. Second, we actively exploit g_i ensures that the rim conforms to the shared parameters
pottery’s physical properties, such as consistency of profile (r^\mathrm {\mathrm {rim}}, h^\mathrm {\mathrm {rim}}). We again use Cauchy kernels ρf , ρg to handle
curve and non-overlapping, to prune out remaining incorrect potential outliers, while µ and ν control the relative importance
of the axis consistency and rim consistency terms.
matching pairs after the ICP algorithm converges.
Combining these two parts into a single objective, we solve:
Forming correspondences. In the initial iteration of ICP,
we use correspondence pairs from descriptor matching. In
subsequent iterations, correspondence pairs are formed by
  \argmin _{\m T^A, \m T^B,r^{\mathrm {rim}},h^{\mathrm {rim}}} J_{R}(A,B) + \sum _{E\,\in \, \{A, B\}} J_{I}(E) \eqlabel {eq:PMCostFunction}
(4)
retrieving mutually closest points based on Euclidean distance,
◦
pruning pairs with normal vector differences exceeding 30 .
In the PM module, only two sherds are considered at a time.
Minimizing correspondence distances.
Given a set of correspondence ΩAB between sherd A and We employ the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm for the robust
B, we refine each sherd’s transformation TA = (RA , tA ) and nonlinear optimization described above, iteratively updating all
TB = (RB , tB ), where RA , RB ∈ SO(3) and tA , tB ∈ R3 . variables. At each ICP iteration, the LM algorithm runs for a
If the sherds involve a shared rim region, we also include maximum of 100 iterations, and we set the overall maximum
rim radius and height with respect to the axis of symmetry, number of ICP iteration to 150. By balancing pairwise fracture
(rrim , hrim ), as optimization variables. Our objective consists matching in Eq. (8) with individual constraints in Eq. (14), we
of two main parts: a pairwise cost JR (A, B) for aligning the achieve stable reconstructions. This cost functions minimize
fracture correspondences between two sherds, an individual distance and normal mismatches between shards and ensure
cost JI (A) for enforcing each sherd’s axis or rim consistency the consistent alignment of axes and rims across multiple
fragments. Detailed definitions of equations can be found in
constraints.
our supplementary materials [43].
First, the pairwise cost is defined as
3) Geometric verification: LCS feature matching and ICP
  &J_R(A, B) := \sum _{\smash {\mathclap {(i,j)\in \Omega ^{AB}}}} \rho _d(d_{ij}(\m T^A, \m T^B)) + \lambda \rho _e(e^2_{ij}(\m T^A, \m T^B)) \eqlabel {eq:J_R} (2) refinement procedures produce plausible pairwise results. However, these methods primarily rely on local information, which
where (i, j) indexes a correspondence in ΩAB . dij measures a can lead to numerous false positive matches. This includes
geometric distance between two fracture points or between a cases where physical constraints (e.g. avoiding penetration) or
point and a line, while eij quantifies the mismatch between their global pottery shapes (e.g. consistency with profile curves) are
surface normals. To handle outlier correspondences effectively, violated, as shown in Fig. 10. These limitations stem from
we adopt robust Cauchy kernels ρd , ρe and scale eij by a the sharp geometric properties of broken ceramic sherds (see
factor λ to control its relative influence. In practice, the initial Sec. III-A). To address this issue, we propose a geometric
iteration of the ICP algorithm treats dij as a point-to-point verification process to further eliminate false positive matches.
(P2P) distance, providing a high-quality starting assumption.
First, we employ overlapping region detection to verify the
From the next iteration onward, we switch to a point-to-line physical compatibility of sherds by identifying overlapping
(P2L) distance, which better captures the geometric relationship areas between them. Next, we validate the axis profile curve
between points and lines along the fracture edges, resulting in to ensure continuity and smoothness by analyzing a 2D profile
a more accurate alignment (see Fig. 9).
curve. This profile curve is obtained by projecting the inner

9

Algorithm 1 Multi-graph beam search (Sec. IV-D)
Inputs: Sherds and pairwise matching pairs
Outputs: Set of output states S O
1: Select the top-b sherds that have the greatest number of
edges as the initial graphs in the state (s1 = {g1 , · · · , gb })
and append it to the set of states (S)
2: for s ∈ S do \triangleright  Exploring candidates for state expansion
3:
s ← S.pop()
D. Base-agnostic incremental sherd registration
4:
if n(s) < b or n(LP (s)) < ϵ then
We now describe the BAISER module, as illustrated in Fig. 4.
5:
Replenish the graph in the s with unmatched sherds
As multiple sherds are involved in the optimization process,
6:
end if
n(Φ) ≥ 2 at this stage, where Φ is the set of relevant sherds
7:
Recompute axis-based descriptor
in the optimization process. Our BAISER module adopts an
8:
Pairwise matching, including inter-graphs connections
incremental SfM-like approach, where we iteratively refine
9:
for Possible matching pairs do
the reassembly configuration of multiple sherds and verify 10:
Sherd registration & geometric verification
geometric criteria. In doing so, we effectively prune spurious 11: end for
or inconsistent connections between sherds, akin to how SfM 12: Generate Lp (s) (priority candidates)
discards erroneous matches in a scene graph.
13:
if s satisfies end condition then
Additionally, BAISER employs multi-graph beam search to 14:
Append s to set of output states S O and continue
efficiently explore potential reassembly paths, enabling simul- 15: end if
taneous reconstruction of multiple potteries (see Algorithm 1). 16: for Top-b candidates (Φ ∈ LP (s)) do \triangleright  State expansion
The graphs in a state can be merged as the search progresses, 17:
Global sherds adjustment & geometric verification
providing flexibility (see Sec. V-E for experimental results) and 18:
if Expanded state is geometrically plausible then
enabling the algorithm to prioritize the reconstruction of pottery 19:
Compute reassembly score
that is easier to assemble. For instance, if Pot A has distinct 20:
Append it to the S
features that yield higher pairwise matching scores compared 21:
end if
to others, the algorithm will generate states predominantly 22: end for
containing graphs related to Pot A in its early stage.
23: end for
1) Notations: We define a state, s, as a possible configuration 24: Discard redundant permutations
of sherds. Each state consists of several graphs, g, where each 25: Sort S based on the reassembly score
graph represents incrementally reconstructed pottery. In the 26: Select top-k states and remove others in S
graph the nodes represent the sherds and the edges represent 27: if S = ∅ then
the sherd connectivity. For example, the state s = {g1 , g2 , g3 }, 28: Terminate algorithm
as shown in Fig. 12, contains three distinct graphs that do not 29: end if
share any sherds, each representing an individual reconstructing 30: goto line 2
pottery. Similarly, we define a set of states, S, as a collection of
such states. In the multi-graph beam search algorithm, we use
one another set of states S O , called set of output states. A state algorithm—to explore potential candidates for expansion.
becomes finalized in two cases: (1) when there are no priority Next, using this state, axis-based descriptors and pairwise
candidates left, although unmatched sherds could still exist, feature matching are recomputed (line 7-8). This recomputation
and (2) when all the sherds have been reconstructed. Finally, a enhances both the geometric features and the quality of pairwise
’branch‘ (or b) represents the number of states expanded from matching candidates because the previously selected top-k
a given state, while a ’beam‘ (or k) refers to the top-ranked states were globally adjusted with multiple sherds. Furthermore,
states carried forward to the next iteration.
potential graph merging scenarios are explored within the state,
2) Procedural overview: During each iteration of the algo- thereby ensuring a base-agnostic property.
rithm, S contains less than or equal to k number of states.
Similar to the PM module, the pairwise matching results
Each state then goes through mainly two phases: exploring are adjusted using ICP and discarded if they do not satisfy the
candidates for expansion (line 2-15 in Algorithm 1) and state geometric criteria (line 9-11). However, unlike the PM module,
expansion (line 16-22). At the end of each iteration, the set the sherd registration optimizes only the newly added sherds
of states are pruned and sorted based on the reassembly score while keeping the previously reconstructed ones fixed. Because
and only the top-k states are retained for the next iteration many potential pairwise matching candidates are explored, the
(line 24-26). The iterative nature of the algorithm, which global adjustment—similar to bundle adjustment in SfM—is
cycles back to line 2 if S is not empty (line 27-30), ensures not carried out during the exploration stage, but only on the
comprehensive exploration of plausible configurations until no most probable candidates in state expansion stage to ensure
further expansions are possible.
computational efficiency.
3) Exploring candidates for expansion: First, a state is
The adjusted potential candidates are then pruned and
popped out from the set (S)—which contains either previously prioritized, generating priority candidates list for effective
expanded states or the initial state from the beginning of expansion (line 12). If the state does not contain priority
surface edge line points onto radius-height (rz) plane with
respect to the axis of symmetry. Conceptually, we approximate
the curve from the projected edge line points and then compute
the approximation error to discard configurations with high
erros. Implementation details are provided in the supplementary
material [43].

10

8
2

7
1
!!

9
6
4
!"
State
State

Pot A

Pot D

Pot G

Fig. 11. It illustrates the distinctive base fragments of Pot A, D, and G. Pot
A and D exhibit apparent base features characterized by a flat surface or a
sharp transition from the base to the side surface. On the other hand, Pot G
presents challenges in identifying the base fragment due to its limited flat
region.

SfS
SfS

8
5

2
3
!#

7
1
!!

9
5

6
4
!"

3
!#

State
State

SfS++

SfS++

Fig. 12. An illustration of the priority candidates is shown in green color.
Solid lines indicate nodes reconstructed in previous iteration, while dotted
lines represent edges obtained from feature matching (Sec. IV-C). Each state
contains multiple graphs, with each individual graph representing a separate
pottery reconstruction.

candidates, then, assuming sherd reconstruction is complete, it sherds that were previously reassembled. In such cases, the
relative poses within Φnew remain unchanged—that is the
is appended to the set of output states (S O , lines 13-15).
Graph merging. Previous work [9] relied on explicitly multiple sherds are considered as a single reassembled large
defined base features to guide pottery reassembly. However, as chunk. After sherd registration, infeasible configurations are
shown in Fig. 11, reconstruction becomes challenging when filtered using the geometric criteria described in Sec. IV-C3.
Generation of priority candidates list Even after filtering
base fragments are difficult to assemble. To address this,
we adopt a base-agnostic approach using the graph merging out implausible configurations through the sherd registration
mechanism illustrated in Fig. 12. Graph merging is a special process, numerous false positive, indistinguishable potential
case of matching candidates. By allowing graph merging, we matching pairs and similar configurations remain due to the
no longer assume that different graphs within the same state inherent properties of ceramic pots (as described in Sec. III-A).
necessarily represent distinct potteries; consequently, the total To address this, we combine similar matching candidates and
number of graphs in the state does not directly correspond to prioritize them by evaluating their likelihood.
First, the results of the sherd registration process are grouped
the total number of mixed pots. For example, during the single
reassembly of Pot A, multiple graphs may coexist within the based on the similarity of their transformation matrices, using
same state, but these graphs do not share any sherds and all thresholds of 25 ◦ for rotation and 20 mm for translation. Next,
belong to Pot A. In Fig. 12, while graph g3 could only contain we compute the average transformation matrix of the combined
external sherds (nodes 8 and 9) in SfS, SfS++ includes both pairs to serve as the initial condition for the global sherds
adjustment (Sec IV-D4). Then, a score for each combined
graph g1 and g2 as viable reconstruction candidates.
After merging the graphs, the state is replenished with an matching pair is calculated based on the number of inliers.
unmatched sherd that has the highest number of pairwise Based on these scores, the candidates are sorted, resulting in
matches from the previous computation, thereby opening up a prioritized list of candidates, LP (si ) = [Φ1 , Φ2 , · · · ], where
Φj = Φold
∪ Φnew
for the state si ∈ S. These candidates
another potential graph to grow.
j
j
new
Sherd registration. Let Φ
represent a set of new sherds represent the most probable reassembly configurations at the
to be reassembled, and Φold denote a previously reassembled current state.
set of sherds. The sherd registration attempts to attach the new
4) State expansion: Based on the generated priority cansherds (Φnew , n(Φnew ) ≥ 1) to the existing reassembled sherds didates (e.g. list of most probable expansion path from the
(Φold , n(Φold ) ≥ 1), analogous to the incremental addition of current state), the algorithm expands the state with b potential
new images or views in SfM.
matching configurations (line 16-22). Each expanded state then
Without loss of generality, we assume that the axis of undergoes a global optimization step—referred to as global
symmetry of Φold aligns with the z-axis. The new sherds sherds adjustment—followed by geometric verification (line
D ∈ Φnew are aligned with the z-axis during the registration 17). If an expanded state satisfies the geometric criteria, it is
new
process. Subsequently, the poses of the new sherds ({TΦ }) appended back to the set of states (S) and a global reassembly
are adjusted to achieve the correct configuration relative to the score is computed (line 18-21). Notably, each expanded state
old sherds Φold . This adjustment adheres to constraints such as represents a distinct potential outcome.
rim consistency and axis symmetry. The optimization problem,
Global sherds adjustment. Global sherds adjustment is
described in Eq. (5), is solved while keeping the sherds in conceptually similar to bundle adjustment in incremental SfM,
Φold fixed.
its goal is to enhance global consistency among sherds while
progressively eliminating erroneous configurations in noisy
  \argmin _{\{\m T^{\Phi ^{\mathrm {new}}}\}, r^{\mathrm {rim}}, h^{\mathrm {rim}}}\sum _{D\in \Phi ^{\mathrm {new}}}\left ( \sum \limits _{E \in \Phi ^{\mathrm {old}}} J_R(D, E) + J_I(D) \right ) \eqlabel {eq:SherdRegistration} (5) graphs. For each state, we select the top-b ranked priority
candidates for global configuration adjustment. At this stage,
we solve the similar optimization described at Eq. (5); however,
We use the ICP algorithm (updating correspondences at every the set of relevant sherds now includes all sherds, defined
iteration) as described in Sec. IV-C2. While the default as Φ = Φold ∪ Φnew , where Φold ∩ Φnew = ∅. Unlike the
approach reassembles one sherd at a time (n(Φnew ) = 1), in sherd registration process, previously registered sherds in Φold
the cases involving graph merging, Φnew may include multiple also participate in this adjustment. With a slight abuse of

11

TABLE III
P REPROCESSING RESULTS OF ENHANCED SINGLE POTTERY DATA . I NITIAL PAIRWISE MATCHES WERE COMPUTED AFTER PAIRWISE FEATURE MATCHING
RESULTS , AND THE GEOMETRIC SCREENING PROCESS PRUNED PAIRWISE MATCHES AFTER PAIRWISE ICP. T HE REDUCTION RATIO REPRESENTS THE
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN INITIAL AND PRUNED PAIRWISE MATCHES .
Pot ID
Pottery Type
# sherds
# base sherds (detected / actual)
# false negative base sherds
# rim sherds (detected / actual)
# Ground truth edges
# initial pairwise matches
# pruned pairwise matches
Reduction ratio (%)

A
dish
8
0/1
0
5/6
15
124
70
43.5

B
dish
9
1/1
0
7/ 7
15
114
77
32.5

C
tea pot
4
1 /1
0
0/ 3
5
125
40
68.0

notation, let’s define transformation matrices set of sherds in Φ
as {TΦ } = {TC |∀C ∈ Φ}. We then solve the following global
optimization problem:
  \argmin _{\{\m T^\Phi \},r^{\mathrm {rim}},h^{\mathrm {rim}}} \sum _{A, B\in \Phi } \frac {1}{2} J_{R}(A,B) + \sum _{E\,\in \,\Phi } J_{I}(E) \eqlabel {eq:GlobalCostFunction}

(6)

where JR and JI are defined in Eqs. (8)-(14). As in Sec. IV-C2,
we employ the LM algorithm for nonlinear optimization and
utilize the ICP algorithm to update correspondences. Finally,
the globally adjusted configurations are verified against the
geometric criteria.
State pruning. During each iteration of the beam search,
different paths may yield to the same reconstruction outcome.
We actively identify and eliminate these redundant beams to
maintain efficiency (line 24). The set of states (S) is now
filled with expanded state, which are then sorted based on
their reassembly scores. Only top-k states are retained for next
iteration (line 26).

D
vase
29
6/3
3
1/1
69
2445
891
63.6

E
vase
31
7/4
3
0/1
62
1912
823
57.0

F
dish
6
3/3
1
1/6
7
36
27
25.0

G
dish
7
4/4
1
4/6
10
51
31
39.2

H
dish
11
6/5
1
1/8
17
485
232
52.2

I
vase
27
6/3
3
0/2
65
1424
667
53.2

J
tea pot
11
3/1
2
0/3
21
731
200
72.6

TABLE IV
P REPROCESSING RESULTS OF ENHANCED MULTIPLE POTTERIES DATA . *
INDICATES THAT THE POTS ARE IDENTICAL BUT HAVE DIFFERENT WAYS OF
BREAKING . D ISHES CONTAIN POT ID S A, B, F, G, AND H. I NITIAL
PAIRWISE MATCHES WERE COMPUTED AFTER PAIRWISE FEATURE
MATCHING RESULTS , AND PRUNED PAIRWISE MATCHES WERE PRUNED BY
THE GEOMETRIC SCREENING PROCESS AFTER PAIRWISE ICP. T HE
REDUCTION RATIO REPRESENTS THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN INITIAL AND
PRUNED PAIRWISE MATCHES .

Pot ID
# sherds
# Ground truth edges
# initial pairwise matches
# pruned pairwise matches
Reduction ratio (%)

CJ∗
15
26
1538
427
72.2

EI∗
58
127
6256
2756
55.9

Dishes
41
64
2433
1150
52.7

ABCDE
81
166
11602
4183
63.9

ALL
142
286
35388
12479
64.7

diversity to our dataset. For detailed information on our dataset,
including the number of bases, rims, and pairwise matching
edges, please refer to Table III and IV. For the detection
of base fragment, we followed the previous work [9] (check
supplementary material [43] for more detail).
We prepare 3 different types of datasets: non-enhanced
dataset, obtained using previous method [9]; enhanced dataset
V. E XPERIMENTS
generated using an enhanced edge line method (see Sec. IV-B1);
We conducted comprehensive experiments to evaluate the
and the ground truth data. In the dataset preparation process,
performance of the proposed pipeline under various conditions.
we exclude very small fragments comprising fewer than 50
Through these experiments, we aim to answer the following
points in the respective surface edge lines (with a perimeter
questions: First, how does the performance of the proposed
of approximately 9cm) and special parts such as the handle,
method compare to other SoTA approaches, including the
nose, or ornament. This results in removing 1 piece from pot
previous SfS method [9]? Second, what is the effect of different
C, 2 pieces from pot D, 4 pieces from pot E, 2 pieces from
beam search parameters (k and b)? Third, how does the
pot F, 3 pieces from pot I, and 8 pieces from pot J.
enhanced edge line data influence the results? Last, what are
Generating ground truth data. We received a collection of
the benefits of a base-agnostic pipeline?
reconstructed pot images, each labeled by a team of restoration
experts. Leveraging this information, we manually positioned
A. Datasets
the sherds in their correct locations using CloudCompare1 .
Proposed real pottery dataset. We construct a dataset These correctly placed sherds served as the initial states for
comprising 142 fragments from 10 distinct potteries, which conducting ICP on the fracture surfaces between individual
includes an additional set of 5 potteries in addition to the sherds, resulting in precise reassembly models. Then, for each
previous dataset [9]. Pots A to E are the same as those used pot, we recorded the absolute transformation of each sherd
in the last study, while F to J are the newly introduced objects. with respect to its initial location, and we obtained ground
Specifically, we introduce new dishes (e.g. pots F, G, and truth axis information from these models. Also, we generated a
H), two pairs of identical potteries but shattered differently ground truth matching matrix (M) between sherd i and j, where
(e.g. pair (E, I) and (C, J)), and containing missing fragments [M]ij = 1 if they are connected, otherwise [M]ij = 0. Ground
(e.g. pots F and H). These scenarios reflect common situations truth datasets are based on enhanced edge lines with correctly
encountered in real excavation sites, posing a more challenging identified rim and base indexing.
restoration problem for experts. The profiles of these pots are
Breaking Bad.
Breaking Bad [33] is a large-scale
identical, or missing sherds reduce the connectivity between
1 https://cloudcompare.org/
fragments. Pot H shows a distinctively flat shape, adding further

12

TABLE V
R EASSEMBLY RESULTS OF SINGLE POT WITH ENHANCED DATA COMPARED TO OTHER S OTA, S F S [9] AND S F S++ ( OURS ). N/A INDICATES THAT THE
ALGORITHM CAN NOT PROCESS THE POTTERY DUE TO THE LIMITED NUMBER OF INPUT FRAGMENTS . W E USED k = 5 AND b = 3 BEAM SEARCH
PARAMETERS FOR S F S PIPELINES . W E REPRESENT THE RESULT WITH RESPECT TO THE POT ID AND THE NUMBER OF FRAGMENTS WITH PARENTHESIS AND
USE TWO DIFFERENT METRICS : S HERD ACCURACY (SA) AND E DGE ACCURACY (EA).
Metric

SA (%) ↑

EA (%) ↑

Method
Jigsaw [22]
FRASIER [15]
PuzzleFusion++ [39]
SfS (ours) [9]
SfS++ (ours)
Jigsaw [22]
FRASIER [15]
PuzzleFusion++ [39]
SfS (ours) [9]
SfS++ (ours)

A (8)
25.0
0.0
62.6
0.0
100
6.7
0.0
46.7
0.0
100

B (9)
22.2
22.2
33.3
100
100
6.7
6.7
20.0
100
100

C (4)
0.0
100
50.0
100
100
0.0
40.0
20.0
100
100

D (29)
N/A
N/A
N/A
82.1
82.1
N/A
N/A
N/A
74.2
83.3

E (31)
N/A
N/A
N/A
100
100
N/A
N/A
N/A
77.4
100

F (6)
0.0
33.3
100
100
100
0.0
11.1
100
100
100

G (7)
42.9
0.0
100
0.0
100
20.0
0.0
100
0.0
100

H (11)
0.0
0.0
0.0
81.8
90.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
76.5
88.2

I (27)
N/A
N/A
N/A
88.9
92.6
N/A
N/A
N/A
70.8
90.8

J (11)
0.0
0.0
0.0
18.2
72.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
4.8
76.2

TABLE VI
R EASSEMBLY RESULTS FOR A SINGLE POT FROM THE B REAKING BAD DATASET [33], SHOWING ENHANCED PERFORMANCE COMPARED TO OTHER
STATE - OF - THE - ART METHODS . T HE BEAM SEARCH PARAMETERS USED FOR THE S F S PIPELINES WERE k = 5 AND b = 3. R ESULTS ARE PRESENTED WITH
THE POT ID AND NUMBER OF FRAGMENTS IN PARENTHESES , EVALUATED USING TWO METRICS : S HERD ACCURACY (SA) AND E DGE ACCURACY (EA).
Metric
SA. (%) ↑

EA (%) ↑

Method
Jigsaw [22]
FRASIER [15]
PuzzleFusion++ [39]
SfS++ (ours)
Jigsaw [22]
FRASIER [15]
PuzzleFusion++ [39]
SfS++ (ours)

Plate 1 (12)
16.7
33.3
0.0
83.3
4.5
9.1
0.0
81.8

Plate 2 (8)
0.0
50.0
50.0
100
0.0
33.3
25.0
100

Plate 3 (7)
28.6
100
0.0
100
12.5
100
0.0
100

Bowl 1 (10)
0.0
20.0
20.0
80.0
0.0
9.1
9.1
38.1

Bowl 2 (11)
0.0
54.5
18.2
90.0
0.0
35.7
7.1
83.3

Bowl 3 (6)
0.0
83.3
50.0
100
0.0
27.3
27.3
100

Vase 1 (8)
50.0
25.0
100
75.0
25.0
8.3
100
75.0

Vase 2 (9)
0.0
0.0
55.6
88.9
0.0
0.0
35.7
71.4

Vase 3 (9)
0.0
0.0
100
100
0.0
0.0
100
100

synthetic dataset containing physically realistic fracture patterns orientations between sherds, providing comparable evaluation
of various objects, serving as a crucial benchmark for the metrics. Specifically, we define M as an adjacent matrix, where
reassembly of fractured objects. In this study, we constructed the element [M]ij is one if the sherd pair (i, j) is connected;
a test dataset by selecting three objects from each of the Bowl, otherwise, it is zero. Then, the edge accuracy (EA) is defined
Plate, and Vase classes. The selection criteria were limited as follows:
to axially-symmetric objects with fragments containing both
  \text {EA}:= \frac {1}{|\m M|}\sum _{(i, j) \in \m M} &\mathbb {I}\Big \{ \|\m R^{ij} \ominus \m R_{GT}^{ij}\|_{2}^{2} < \tau _R \\ \nonumber & \cap \|\v t^{ij}- \v t_{GT}^{ij}\|_{2}^{2} < \tau _t \Big \}
interior and exterior surfaces, excluding those with additional
elements such as food. Since the dataset is normalized, we
scaled it to match the size of our dataset for experiments with
our model, which is designed for real-world scenarios, while
retaining the original scale for experiments with other deep where Rij and tij are a relative rotation and translation
learning models. Additionally, these objects were taken from between sherds i and j, respectively. ⊖ represents the smallest
test datasets that the deep learning models had not trained on. angle difference between two rotation matrices. The Sherd
accuracy (SA) is obtained by counting the number of correctly
B. Experimental setup
reconstructed sherds with at least one correct edge. We set
◦
Implementation details. For comparison, we used the offi- threshold values of τR = 20 for 3D rotation (excluding axis
cial code for Jigsaw, Fraiser, and PuzzleFusion++, performing deviation) and τt = 50mm for translation.
inference using pre-trained weights on BreakingBad dataset.
Our algorithm (SfS++) was evaluated on a system with an
C. Results on the reassembly of single and mixed potteries
AMD Ryzen 9 5900X processor and an NVIDIA RTX 3080Ti
In this experiment, we show the superior performance of
GPU, while the other deep learning models were run on a
system with an Intel i9 13900K processor and an NVIDIA the proposed method compared to other methods, including
Jigsaw [22], PuzzleFusion++ [39], FRASIER [15], and SfS [9].
RTX 4090 GPU.
Evaluation metrics. In contrast to the previous study [9],
Reassembly of single pottery. As shown in Table V and Fig.
this pipeline does not rely on the base fragment for re- 1 in the supplementary material [43], our method, SfS++, outconstruction, which makes it challenging to assess success performs data-driven models such as Jigsaw, PuzzleFusion++,
based on specific sherds (previously, we used base sherds and FRASIER in single pottery reassembly experiments using
as a reference). To address this, we introduce two metrics, our real dataset. Data-driven models primarily rely on extracting
edge accuracy, and sherd accuracy, similar to the previous features from the fracture surfaces of the sherds. However, in
studies (part accuracy) [10, 6, 39]. Although we use relative our dataset, the fracture surfaces are thin, making it challenging
transformation difference instead of Chamfer distance, both for these models to capture sufficiently distinctive features.
methods ultimately assess the accuracy of relative positions and This limitation mainly affects the performance of models like

13

TABLE VII
R EASSEMBLY RESULTS OF MULTIPLE MIXED POTTERIES , SHOWING
ENHANCED PERFORMANCE COMPARED TO OTHER STATE - OF - THE - ART
METHODS , S F S [9] AND S F S++ ( OURS ). T HE BEAM SEARCH PARAMETERS
FOR THE S F S PIPELINES WERE SET TO k = 20 AND b = 10. T HE NUMBER
OF FRAGMENTS IS INDICATED IN PARENTHESES UNDER EACH POT ID, AND
TWO METRICS ARE USED FOR EVALUATION : S HERD ACCURACY (SA) AND
E DGE ACCURACY (EA). P OTS MARKED WITH * ARE IDENTICAL BUT
BROKEN IN DIFFERENT WAYS . D ISHES INCLUDE POT ID S A, B, F, G, AND H.

Plate

Bowl

Metric

Method

SA (%) ↑

SfS (ours) [9]
SfS++ (ours)
SfS (ours) [9]
SfS++ (ours)

Vase

Ground Truth

Jigsaw

FRASIER

PuzzleFusion++

SFS++ (Ours)

Fig. 13. Comparison of single-object assembly results between other deep
learning methods and SfS++ with k = 5 and b = 3 (ours) from Breaking
Bad dataset [33]. Only one example per category is visualized here; further
detailed visualizations are provided in the supplementary material [43].

PuzzleFusion++ when the surface area is small, and the features
are less distinct.
In contrast, SfS++ leverages axis-symmetric information
computed from sherd surfaces and edge line geometry to
facilitate more robust feature matching. As a result, it achieves
superior performance in both SA (sherd accuracy) and EA
(edge accuracy) compared to data-driven approaches.
Moreover, our method demonstrates strong performance
on the Breaking Bad dataset (Table VI and Fig. 13). While
our primary focus is on real datasets, SfS++ also generalizes effectively to synthetic datasets and yields competitive
results compared to data-driven models. This highlights the
method’s adaptability across diverse data types, from synthetic
environments to the real world.
When comparing SfS [9] with SfS++, the previous method is
a base-dependent method that relies on the base sherd to guide
the matching process. As shown in Fig. 11, base reassembly
is relatively easy for D due to the sharp transition from the
flat surface to the sides at the base. However, Pot G has a
limited flat area and a subtle curvature change between the
base and the sides, making it challenging to identify the base
fragment. To address this issue, SfS++ eliminates the reliance
on the base and adopts a more flexible matching approach,
effectively handling fragments of varying sizes and shapes. As
demonstrated in Table V, SfS++ outperforms SfS [9], especially
in challenging cases such as Pots H, I, and J.
Finally, SfS++ shows high quality reassembly results, as
shown in Fig. 13 due to the global optimization process (see
Sec. IV-D4 for more detail)2 .
Reassembly of mixed potteries. In the mixed potteries
setting, our SfS++ achieves a state-of-the-art result in the
ABCDE mixed pottery scenario, attaining a SA of 92.5 % (an
8.7 % improvement over the previous state-of-the-art [9]), as
shown in Table VII.
We also achieve an SA of 87.3 % in a total of 10 mixed
pottery experiments comprising 142 fragments. Notably, SfS++
outperforms in the CJ and EI experiments, which involved
the same shapes of pots but were shattered differently. SfS
demonstrates a significant performance drop compared to single
2 More results can be found on the supplementary material [43]

EA (%) ↑

CJ∗
(15)
66.7
80.0
30.8
80.8

EI∗
(58)
62.1
96.6
38.6
95.3

Dishes
(41)
43.9
97.6
34.1
97.0

ABCDE
(81)
83.8
92.5
73.3
90.8

ALL
(142)
29.6
87.3
16.8
85.1

TABLE VIII
R EASSEMBLY RESULTS FOR MULTIPLE MIXED POTS FROM THE B REAKING
BAD DATASET [33]. T HE PARAMETERS FOR THE S F S++ EXPERIMENT WERE
SET TO k = 5 AND b = 3, WITH EVALUATION BASED ON TWO METRICS :
S HERD ACCURACY (SA) AND E DGE ACCURACY (EA).
Metric

Method

SA (%) ↑

PuzzleFusion++ [39]
SfS++ (ours)
PuzzleFusion++ [39]
SfS++ (ours)

EA (%) ↑

Bowl 2 + 3
(16)
0.0
93.8
0.0
91.3

Vase 1 + 3
(17)
23.5
88.2
6.5
90.3

pot experiments. This deterioration is due to the failure in base
reconstruction caused by the strong shape ambiguity, which
is particularly challenging to resolve in the early registration
stages when only a few fragments are available.
Furthermore, we test PuzzleFusion++ [39] and SfS++ on
mixtures of multiple pots from the Breaking Bad dataset [33], as
shown in Table VIII. When two objects are mixed, the number
of false positive matching pairs dramatically increases, and
the algorithm is required to handle them properly. However,
PuzzleFusion++ is unable to reassemble the objects under
noisy conditions. For example, PuzzleFusion++ successfully
reassembles Vase A in a single object test but fails when it is
mixed with another, as shown in Fig. 15. On the other hand,
SfS++ can handle realistic scenarios, mostly mixed fragments
from multiple different objects, involving not only two objects
but also more than ten objects.
D. Ablation study
Effect of different beam search parameters. As shown
in Table IX, we conducted an ablation study on different beam
search parameters within the all-pottery mixed scenario. The
beam search algorithm has two main parameters: k, which
represents the number of beams, or the most likely states at
each step, and b, which indicates the breadth of the algorithm’s
search for possible expansions for the next step. Performance
constantly improves as we increase the values of k and b. We
observe a significant performance jump from k = 5, b = 3 to
k = 5, b = 5. This improvement is primarily due to the large
number of false positive pairs in all mixed pottery scenarios,
as shown in Table IV. These false positive pairs disturb earlystage reconstruction because it is challenging to distinguish
between true and false configurations with only a few sherds.
The beam search algorithm effectively handles this ambiguity

14

Real pots

Reassembled

pOtS(same)

‘."‘.

=i

Reassembled

Pot A

Pot B

'

@) OO

ww

Pot C

Pot F

Pot D

Pot E

"

OO

Pot G

PotH

Pot |

Pot J

Fig. 14. Visualization of the reassembly results of mixed potteries using SfS++ with k = 20 and b = 10 is shown in the figure. The top row displays the
corresponding real pottery examples, while the middle and bottom rows illustrate the reassembled results. A total of 10 potteries, consisting of 142 fragments,
were randomly mixed. The middle row represents the reassembled pots from the same perspective as their corresponding real pottery, whereas the last row
provides an orthogonal view (top or side). For the 3D visualization of the results, please visit our project homepage (https://sj-yoo.info/sfs/).

b0
A,
V1 + V3 (PuzzleFusion++)

V1 + V3 (SFS++)

0
B2 + B3 (PuzzleFusion++)

B2 + B3 (SFS++)

Fig. 15. Comparison of reassembly results of mixed potteries between
PuzzleFusion++ and SfS++ with k = 5 and b = 3 (ours) from Breaking
Bad dataset [33]. The left column shows the reconstruction results using
PuzzleFusion++, while the right column is SfS++.

by utilizing broader searching branches with higher values of
b. However, there is a trade-off between higher b and increased
runtime.
Effect of different data preprocessing methods. As
shown in Fig. 6, our enhanced dataset demonstrates better edge
line quality. This naturally raises the question: how much of the
performance gain can be attributed to the improved dataset? To
answer this, we conducted an ablation study on the performance
across different datasets, as shown in Table X. We observed
consistent performance improvements on better preprocessing
methods from non-enhanced data to enhanced data and ground
truth data. Note that SfS exhibits a performance drop on
Enhanced data due to its reliance on a base-driven assembly
approach. As shown in Fig. 6, previous preprocessing method
extracts the edge line by positioning it slightly inward, whereas
the enhanced preprocessing method yields a breakline that
closely approximates the true edgeline. This change in the edge
characteristics results in altered descriptor values. However,
since the existing SfS hyperparameters were optimized for the
previous edge characteristics, these changes in descriptor values

TABLE IX
A BLATION STUDY 1: E FFECT OF DIFFERENT BEAM SEARCH PARAMETERS
(k AND b) TESTED ON ALL MIXED POTTERY EXPERIMENTS .
(k, b)
SA (%) ↑
EA (%) ↑
Runtime (hour)

(5, 3)
40.1
41.6
4.8

(5, 5)
83.1
73.3
22.5

(10, 5)
85.9
84.6
42.7

(20, 10)
87.3
85.1
137.0

can trigger false positive matches during base reconstruction,
thereby degrading performance as shown in Table III. As
described in Sec. III-C, we can reasonably expect better
performance by leveraging recent data-driven methods to
enhance the quality of data preprocessing since our pipeline
offers a standard structure for addressing the problem.
E. Benefits of base-agnostic pipeline
Robustness. Compared to previous work [9], our proposed
pipeline is independent of base constraints. For instance, in
Fig 11, Pot G exhibits smaller base features than the others,
making it challenging to correctly classify the base without
having a false positive. As a result, SfS (base-dependent
pipeline) fails to reassemble Pot A and G, as shown in Table V,
because it cannot initiate the pipeline without a correctly
reassembled base as the starting state. Furthermore, SfS suffers
from false negative base classifications, as shown in Table X.
Since Pot E was mistakenly classified as a base fragment in our
enhanced data, SfS achieved even lower accuracy than when
using the original non-enhanced dataset, which did not contain
this misclassification result [9]. In contrast, the performance of
our pipeline is not affected by these base classification results.
Flexibility. Since our pipeline does not impose initial
constraints on the reconstruction process, Algorithm 1 can
choose the initial start fragment solely based on matching
priority. As a result, the searching path can expand broadly
from the initial stage, leading to successful reconstruction
results with a small number of branches (b) and beams
(k) as demonstrated in Table IX. The graph merging adds
further flexibility to the algorithm by avoiding the case that

15

TABLE X
A BLATION STUDY 2: E FFECT OF DIFFERENT DATA PREPROCESSING
METHODS INCLUDING NON - ENHANCED ( BLUE IN F IG . 6), ENHANCED ( RED
IN F IG . 6), AND GROUND TRUTH . T HE ALGORITHMS ARE TESTED ON
ABFGH POTTERIES MIXED EXPERIMENT WITH k = 20 AND b = 10 BEAM
SEARCH PARAMETERS AND REPORTED WITH EDGE ACCURACY (EA)
METRIC IN PERCENTAGE .
Data
Method
SfS [9]
SfS++

Non-enhanced

Enhanced

Ground truth

73.4
93.8

34.1
97.0

95.1
100

discards well-reconstructed graphs from previous iterations
instead of utilizing them. In the previous algorithm [9], welldeveloped graphs would be removed if they fell behind others.
However, the current approach allows merging them with
others, considering them as potential reconstruction candidates
(Sec. IV-D3. Additionally, the proposed approach builds easy
pottery first (i.e. larger pottery), which aligns with our intuition.
As a result, our pipeline can successfully reassemble a large
number of fragments (i.e. 10 potteries with 142 fragments),
while the Base-dependent pipeline failed to scale up.
F. Limitations
Although our model demonstrates state-of-the-art performance across various datasets, it does have some limitations.
Firstly, applying the model requires several preprocessing
steps, such as surface extraction, fracture line adjustment, and
counterclockwise alignment. These processes can add extra
time depending on the complexity of the data. Secondly, while
we have tuned the parameters for real-world scenarios, some
constraints require parameter adjustments or data scaling when
the dataset changes. Moreover, the model assembles fragments
based on axes, limiting its application to axis-symmetric
objects. This makes applying the model to asymmetric objects
challenging, potentially reducing its flexibility in handling a
wider variety of objects.
VI. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we have addressed the problem of virtually
reassembling axially symmetric pots from 3D scanned fragments. To tackle this challenge, we proposed Structure-fromSherds++ (SfS++), a novel optimization-based pipeline inspired
by the incremental approach of Structure-from-Motion (SfM).
SfS++ utilizes multi-graph beam search with an incremental
reassembly strategy, enabling the individual, simultaneous, and
base-agnostic reconstruction of multiple intermixed potteries in
complex scenarios. Through experiments on a dataset of 142
real fragments from 10 different potteries, we demonstrated that
SfS++ achieves a reconstruction accuracy of 87%, surpassing
existing state-of-the-art methods.
While these results highlight our approach’s strengths, base
information is important for improving reconstruction in realworld scenarios. Base fragment help identify mixed potteries
and reduce false positives in feature matching. In future
work, we will utilize base information to enhance pottery
identification, even under imperfect base segmentation.

R EFERENCES
[1] Y. Cao and D. Mumford, “Geometric structure estimation
of axially symmetric pots from small fragments,” in
Proceedings of Signal Processing, Pattern Recognition,
and Applications, 2002.
[2] Y.-C. Chen, H. Li, D. Turpin, A. Jacobson, and A. Garg,
“Neural Shape Mating: Self-Supervised Object Assembly
With Adversarial Shape Priors,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2022, pp. 12 724–12 733.
[3] L. Di Angelo, P. Di Stefano, and E. Guardiani, “A
review of computer-based methods for classification and
reconstruction of 3D high-density scanned archaeological
pottery,” Journal of Cultural Heritage, vol. 56, pp. 10–24,
Jul. 2022.
[4] B. Duisterhof, L. Zust, P. Weinzaepfel, V. Leroy, Y. Cabon,
and J. Revaud, “Mast3r-sfm: a fully-integrated solution
for unconstrained structure-from-motion,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2409.19152, 2024.
[5] S. R. Graff, “Archaeological Studies of Cooking and Food
Preparation,” Journal of Archaeological Research, vol. 26,
no. 3, pp. 305–351, Sep. 2018.
[6] A. N. Harish, R. Nagar, and S. Raman, “RGL-NET: A
Recurrent Graph Learning framework for Progressive
Part Assembly,” in IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on
Applications of Computer Vision, Jan. 2022, pp. 647–656.
[7] J. H. Hong, Y. M. Kim, K.-C. Wi, and J. Kim, “PotSAC:
A Robust Axis Estimator for Axially Symmetric Pot Fragments,” in IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision Workshops, Oct 2019.
[8] J. H. Hong*, S. J. Yoo*, M. Z. Arshard, Y. M.
Kim, and J. Kim, “Supplementary document for
structure-from-sherds: Incremental 3d reassembly of
axially symmetric pots from unordered and mixed
fragment collections,” https://github.com/SeongJong-Yoo/
structure-from-sherds, 2021.
[9] J. H. Hong, S. J. Yoo, M. A. Zeeshan, Y. M. Kim, and
J. Kim, “Structure-from-sherds: Incremental 3d reassembly of axially symmetric pots from unordered and mixed
fragment collections,” in IEEE International Conference
on Computer Vision, 2021, pp. 5443–5451.
[10] j. Huang, G. Zhan, Q. Fan, K. Mo, L. Shao, B. Chen, L. J.
Guibas, and H. Dong, “Generative 3D Part Assembly via
Dynamic Graph Learning,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33. Curran Associates,
Inc., 2020, pp. 6315–6326.
[11] Q.-X. Huang, S. Flöry, N. Gelfand, M. Hofer, and
H. Pottmann, “Reassembling fractured objects by geometric matching,” ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 25, no. 3, p.
569–578, Jul. 2006.
[12] C. Jia, L. He, X. Yang, X. Han, B. Chang, and X. Han,
“Developing a Reassembling Algorithm for Broken Objects,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 220 320–220 334, 2020.
[13] M. Kampel and R. Sablatnig, “Profile-based Pottery
Reconstruction,” in 2003 Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition Workshop, vol. 1, Jun. 2003,
pp. 4–4. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/

16

abstract/document/4624518
[14] J. E. Kim, M. Z. Arshad, S. J. Yoo, J.-H. Hong, J. Kim,
and Y. M. Kim, “3d pots configuration system by
optimizing over geometric constraints,” in International
Conference on Pattern Recognition, 2021, pp. 2398–2405.
[15] J. Kim, I. Lee, and K. Joo, “Fracture assembly with
segmentation and iterative registration,” in IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing. IEEE, 2024, pp. 6945–6949.
[16] N. Lamb, C. Palmer, B. Molloy, S. Banerjee, and N. K.
Banerjee, “Fantastic Breaks: A Dataset of Paired 3D Scans
of Real-World Broken Objects and Their Complete Counterparts,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp.
4681–4691.
[17] V. Leitch, “Reconstructing history through pottery: The
contribution of Roman N African cookwares,” Journal of
Roman Archaeology, vol. 26, pp. 281–306, Jan. 2013.
[18] M. Leordeanu and M. Hebert, “A spectral technique
for correspondence problems using pairwise constraints,”
in IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision,
vol. 2, 2005, pp. 1482–1489 Vol. 2.
[19] Q. Li, G. Geng, and M. Zhou, “Pairwise Matching for
3D Fragment Reassembly Based on Boundary Curves
and Concave-Convex Patches,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp.
6153–6161, 2020.
[20] H.-Y. Liu, J.-W. Guo, H.-Y. Jiang, Y.-C. Liu, X.-P.
Zhang, and D.-M. Yan, “PuzzleNet: Boundary-Aware
Feature Matching for Non-Overlapping 3D Point Clouds
Assembly,” Journal of Computer Science and Technology,
vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 492–509, Jun. 2023.
[21] D. G. Lowe, “Distinctive image features from scaleinvariant keypoints,” Int. J. Comput. Vision, vol. 60, no. 2,
p. 91–110, Nov. 2004.
[22] J. Lu, Y. Sun, and Q. Huang, “Jigsaw: Learning to Assemble Multiple Fractured Objects,” Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, vol. 36, pp. 14 969–
14 986, Dec. 2023.
[23] H. Mara and R. Sablatnig, “Orientation of fragments
of rotationally symmetrical 3d-shapes for archaeological
documentation,” in Proceedings of the Third International
Symposium on 3D Data Processing, Visualization, and
Transmission, ser. 3DPVT ’06. Washington, DC, USA:
IEEE Computer Society, 2006, pp. 1064–1071.
[24] J. C. McBride and B. B. Kimia, “Archaeological fragment reconstruction using curve-matching,” in IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Workshop, vol. 1, 2003, pp. 3–3.
[25] G. Papaioannou, T. Schreck, A. Andreadis, P. Mavridis,
R. Gregor, I. Sipiran, and K. Vardis, “From reassembly
to object completion: A complete systems pipeline,” J.
Comput. Cult. Herit., vol. 10, no. 2, Mar. 2017.
[26] H. Pottmann, M. Peternell, and B. Ravani, “An introduction to line geometry with applications,” Computer-Aided
Design, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 3–16, 1999.
[27] C. R. Qi, L. Yi, H. Su, and L. J. Guibas, “PointNet++:
Deep Hierarchical Feature Learning on Point Sets in a
Metric Space,” Jun. 2017.

[28] G. Qian, Y. Li, H. Peng, J. Mai, H. Hammoud, M. Elhoseiny, and B. Ghanem, “PointNeXt: Revisiting PointNet++
with Improved Training and Scaling Strategies,” Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp.
23 192–23 204, Dec. 2022.
[29] Z. Qin, H. Yu, C. Wang, Y. Guo, Y. Peng, and K. Xu,
“Geometric Transformer for Fast and Robust Point Cloud
Registration,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022,
pp. 11 143–11 152.
[30] R. B. Rusu and S. Cousins, “3D is here: Point Cloud
Library (PCL),” in IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, Shanghai, China, May 9-13
2011.
[31] A. Savitzky and M. J. E. Golay, “Smoothing and differentiation of data by simplified least squares procedures,”
Analytical Chemistry, vol. 36, pp. 1627–1639, 1964.
[32] J. L. Schönberger and J.-M. Frahm, “Structure-fromMotion Revisited,” in IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016.
[33] S. Sellán, Y.-C. Chen, Z. Wu, A. Garg, and A. Jacobson,
“Breaking bad: A dataset for geometric fracture and
reassembly,” Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 35, pp. 38 885–38 898, 2022.
[34] K. Son, E. B. Almeida, and D. B. Cooper, “Axially
symmetric 3d pots configuration system using axis of
symmetry and break curve,” in IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, June 2013.
[35] The CGAL Project, CGAL User and Reference Manual,
5th ed. CGAL Editorial Board, 2020.
[36] T. Tsesmelis, L. Palmieri, M. Khoroshiltseva, A. Islam, G. Elkin, O. I. Shahar, G. Scarpellini, S. Fiorini,
Y. Ohayon, N. Alali, S. Aslan, P. Morerio, S. Vascon,
E. Gravina, M. C. Napolitano, G. Scarpati, G. Zuchtriegel,
A. Spühler, M. E. Fuchs, S. James, O. Ben-Shahar,
M. Pelillo, and A. D. Bue, “Re-assembling the past: The
RePAIR dataset and benchmark for real world 2D and
3D puzzle solving,” Nov. 2024.
[37] H. Wang, Y. Zang, F. Liang, Z. Dong, H. Fan, and
B. Yang, “A Probabilistic Method for Fractured Cultural
Relics Automatic Reassembly,” Journal on Computing
and Cultural Heritage, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 5:1–5:25, 2021,
01, 22.
[38] J. Wang, N. Karaev, C. Rupprecht, and D. Novotny,
“Vggsfm: Visual geometry grounded deep structure from
motion,” in IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 21 686–21 697.
[39] Z. Wang, J. Chen, and Y. Furukawa, “Puzzlefusion++:
Auto-agglomerative 3d fracture assembly by denoise and
verify,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.00259, 2024.
[40] A. Willis, X. Orriols, and D. B. Cooper, “Accurately estimating sherd 3d surface geometry with application to pot
reconstruction,” in Proceedings of the 2003 Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshop,
vol. 1, June 2003, pp. 5–5.
[41] A. R. Willis and D. B. Cooper, “Bayesian assembly of 3d
axially symmetric shapes from fragments,” in Proceedings
of the 2004 IEEE Computer Society Conference on

17

Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2004. CVPR
2004., vol. 1, June 2004, pp. I–I.
[42] S. Ye, C. Zhu-Tian, X. Chu, K. Li, J. Luo, Y. Li, G. Geng,
and Y. Wu, “PuzzleFixer: A Visual Reassembly System
for Immersive Fragments Restoration,” IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 29, no. 1,
pp. 429–439, Jan. 2023.
[43] S. J. Yoo*, S. Liu*, M. Z. Arshad, J. Kim, Y. M.
Kim, Y. Aloimonos, C. Ferm¨uller, K. Joo, J. Kim,
and H. J. Hyeong, “Supplementary materials: Structurefrom-sherds++: Robust incremental 3d reassembly of
axially symmetric pots from unordered and mixed
fragment collections,” https://github.com/SeongJong-Yoo/
Pottery-Hierarchy-Clear, 2025.
[44] S. J. Yoo, S. Liu, M. Z. Arshad, J. Kim, Y. M. Kim,
Y. Aloimonos, C. Fermüller, K. Joo, J. Kim, and J. H.
Hong, “Structure-from-sherds++: Robust incremental 3d
reassembly of axially symmetric pots from unordered and
mixed fragment collections,” 2025.
[45] C. Zach, M. Klopschitz, and M. Pollefeys, “Disambiguating visual relations using loop constraints,” in 2010 IEEE
Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2010, pp. 1426–1433.
[46] K. Zhang, W. Yu, M. Manhein, W. Waggenspack, and
X. Li, “3d fragment reassembly using integrated template guidance and fracture-region matching,” in IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2015, pp.
2138–2146.

Muhammad Zeeshan Arshad completed his Master’s and Ph.D. degrees at Myongji University, Yongin, South Korea. He has worked as a postdoctoral
fellow at the Center for Artificial Intelligence (CAI)
at the Korea Institute of Science and Technology
(KIST), Seoul, and is currently a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Ottawa. His research has
transitioned from monitoring, fault detection, and
diagnostics using machine data to physiological data,
with a focus on applying artificial intelligence (AI) in
healthcare. His key areas of interest include algorithm
design, time series modeling, and the development of ML/DL models,
particularly in their application to gait analysis.

Jinhyeok Kim is a M.S. student of the Artificial
Intelligence Graduate School at UNIST, South Korea.
He received B.E. degree in the Department of
Computer Science from UNIST, South Korea in 2023.
His research interests include generative model and
neural rendering for 3d understanding.

Young Min Kim is an Associate Professor in the
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
at Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea. She
received a B.S. from Seoul National University in
2006 and an M.S. and Ph.D. in electrical engineering from Stanford University in 2008 and 2013,
respectively. Before joining SNU, she was a Senior
Research Scientist at the Korea Institute of Science
and Technology (KIST). Her research interest lies
in 3D vision, where she combines computer vision,
graphics, and robotics algorithms to solve practical
problems.

Seongjong Yoo received the B.S and M.S degrees
in mechanical engineering from Soongsil University,
South Korea, in 2017 and 2019, respectively. After
graduation, he served alternative military service at
Korea Institute of Science and Technology for three
years. He is currently a Ph.D. student in computer
science department at University of Maryland, MD,
USA. His research interests include computer vision,
multi-modal perception and digital humans.

Yiannis Aloimonos currently is a professor of
computational vision and intelligence with the the
Department of Computer Science, University of
Maryland, College Park, and the director of the Computer Vision Laboratory at the Institute for Advanced
Computer Studies (UMIACS). He is interested in
Active Perception and the modeling of vision as
an active, dynamic process for real time robotic
systems. For the past five years, he has been working
on bridging signals and symbols, specifically on
the relationship of vision to reasoning, action, and
language.

Sisung Liu received the B.Sc. degree in Applied
Physics from Hanyang University in 2023. Currently,
he is pursuing a Ph.D. degree in the Department
of Artificial Intelligence at Hanyang University. His
research interests include neural geometry estimation
and information forensics.

Cornelia Fermüller received an MS degree from
the Graz University of Technology and a PhD
degree from the Vienna University of Technology,
Austria in applied mathematics. She is a research
scientist at the University of Maryland Institute for
Advanced Computer Studies. Her research interest
has been understanding the principles of active vision
systems and developing biological-inspired methods,
especially in motion. Her recent work has focused
on human action interpretation and the development
of event-based motion algorithms.

18

Kyungdon Joo is an associate professor of the
Artificial Intelligence Graduate School and the Department of Computer Science at UNIST, South
Korea. He received the B.E. degree in School of
Electrical and Computer Engineering from University
of Seoul, South Korea in 2012, and the M.S. and
Ph.D. degrees in Robotics Program and School of
Electrical Engineering from KAIST, South Korea in
2014 and 2019, respectively. Before joining UNIST,
he was a postdoctoral researcher at CMU RI, US.
He was a member of “Team KAIST,” which won
the first place in DARPA Robotics Challenge Finals 2015. He was a research
intern at Oculus Research (Facebook Reality Labs), Pittsburgh in 2017. His
research interests include computer vision and robotics.

Jinwook Kim received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D.
degrees in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
from Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, in
1995, 1997, and 2002, respectively. He is currently
a Principal Research Scientist at Intelligence and Interaction Research Center, Korea Institute of Science
and Technology (KIST). His research interests include human motion analysis, healthcare technology,
and assistive systems for elderly care, leveraging
virtual reality, computer graphics, simulation, and
machine learning.

Je Hyeong Hong received B.A. and M.Eng. degrees
in Engineering (Electrical and Information Sciences)
from the University of Cambridge, UK in 2011,
and subsequently received a Ph.D. degree in Engineering (Computer Vision) from the University of
Cambridge, UK, in 2018 after collaborating with
Microsoft and Toshiba Research Europe. He served
alternative military service in South Korea as a
postdoctoral researcher at the Korea Institute of
Science and Technology (KIST) between 2018 and
2021. Currently, Je Hyeong is an Assistant Professor
in the Department of Electronic Engineering at Hanyang University in South
Korea, a position he has held since 2021. He has published several papers at
prestigious conferences such as CVPR, ECCV, ICCV and ICASSP. His main
research interests include computer vision, machine learning and optimization.

19

Supplementary Materials: Structure-from-Sherds++:
Robust Incremental 3D Reassembly of Axially
Symmetric Pots from Unordered and Mixed
Fragment Collections
Seong Jong Yoo, Student Member, IEEE, Sisung Liu, Student Member, IEEE, Muhammad Zeeshan Arshad,
Jinhyeok Kim, Young Min Kim, Yiannis Aloimonos, Cornelia Fermüller, Kyungdon Joo, Jinwook Kim, and Je
Hyeong Hong, Member, IEEE

I. A PPENDIX A - C LUSTER MERGING
TABLE I
PARAMETERS USED IN CLUSTER MERGING ALGORITHM .
Parameter
k1
k2
ρd
ρn
ρc
ρin,n
ρin,c

Value
10
30
1.0
0.95
0.1
0.75
0.25

Description
Neighbors for boundary evaluation
Neighbors for normal estimation
Distance threshold for boundary pairs
Normal sim. threshold
Curvature diff. threshold
Normal sim. threshold (internal)
Curvature diff. threshold (internal)

After applying the region growing algorithm, a single
continuous surface may become over-segmented into multiple
clusters. To address this issue, we employ a cluster merging
algorithm. In this algorithm, we first define a cluster pair
(Ci , Cj ), which consists of two distinct clusters. The purpose
of defining such a pair is to assess whether the clusters belong
to the same continuous surface by examining adjacent boundary
points between them.
For each cluster pair, boundary point pairs are detected within
the specified distance threshold ρd as described in Alg. 1 (Step
1). In this step, the boundary status of each point is evaluated by
considering k1 neighboring points and at least three boundary
point pairs must be detected. If the number of boundary point
pairs is less than three, the cluster pair is considered to contain
noisy or unstable boundary information and is excluded from
merging. Next, for each boundary point, an average normal
is computed using k2 neighbors to estimate the local surface
normal vector. If the dot product between the average normal
vectors is at least ρn , and the difference in mean curvature is
below ρc , the boundary points are deemed similar, indicating
that the boundaries of the two clusters likely belong to the
same continuous surface (Alg. 1, Step 2).
Since boundary conditions alone may not fully overcome
noise or inaccuracies near the boundaries, additional reliable
internal information is incorporated. As shown in Alg. 1 (Step
3), each cluster selects a representative internal point pin
i , which
is the median point sorted by perpendicular distance to the
principal axis, and the normals and curvatures of these internal
points are compared using thresholds ρin,n for normals and
ρin,c for curvatures. The clusters are merged only if both

the boundary and internal conditions are satisfied. Once the
conditions are met, cluster Cj is merged into Ci (Alg. 1, Step
4), and this process is repeated until no further mergers can
be performed (Alg. 1, Line 28).
II. A PPENDIX B - ICP REFINEMENT
After obtaining initial candidate pairs through descriptor
matching, false matches may still exist. To eliminate these, we
apply the Iterative Closest Point (ICP) algorithm to iteratively
optimize point-to-point or point-to-line alignments, thereby
refining the local alignment between sherds.
Pairwise cost function.
  J_R(A, B):=\sum _{\smash {\mathclap {(i,j)\in \Omega ^{AB}}}} \rho _d(d_{ij}(\m T^A, \m T^B)) + \lambda \rho _e(e^2_{ij}(\m T^A, \m T^B)) \eqlabel {eq:J_R} (8)
Equation (8) encourages two sherds, A and B, to align their
shared fracture surfaces (edge lines) by matching corresponding
points. Let ΩAB = {(i, j)|qA
∈ A, qB
∈ B} as the
i
j
correspondence index set between sherd A and sherd B. Here,
ρd (·) and ρe (·) are Cauchy kernels, and λ is a positive scalar
that balances the weight of the normal misalignment term,
which we set to 0.4 in our experiments. The function dij
represents the geometric error (e.g. point-to-point or pointto-line distance) between the corresponding points and eij
measures the squared difference between their surface normals.
At first ICP iteration, we use geometric error function as a
A B
point-to-point (P2P) alignment (dij (TA , TB ) = dP2P
ij (T , T ):
  d_{ij}^{\mathrm {P2P}}(\m T^A, \m T^B)&:= d(\v p^A_i, \hat {\v n}^A_i, \v p^B_j, \hat {\v n}^B_j, \m T^A, \m T^B) \\ \nonumber &= \bigl \| m_{ij}(\m T^A, \m T^B) \bigr \|_2^2

  m_{ij}(\m T^A, \m T^B)&:= m_{ij}(\v p^A_i, \hat {\v n}^A_i, \v p^B_j, \hat {\v n}^B_j, \m T^A, \m T^B) \\ \nonumber &= \m R^A \v p^A_i + \v t^A - \m R^B \v p^B_j - \v t^B

where RA , RB ∈ R3×3 are rotation matrices that transform
sherds A and B, tA , tB ∈ R3 are translation vectors, and
B
pA
i , pj are points on each sherd’s edge line.
Once the sherds have been roughly aligned after the first
iteration of ICP, we switch the P2P alignment to point-to-line
(P2L) alignment. Empirically, P2P model often adjusts precise

20

Algorithm 1 Cluster merging algorithm
Require: Clusters {C1 , . . . , Cn };
1: Point cloud with normals;
2: Thresholds: ρd , ρn , ρc , ρin,n , ρin,c ;
3: KNN sizes: k1 , k2 .
′
Ensure: Merged clusters {C1′ , . . . , Cm
}.
4: repeat
5:
for i ← 1 to n − 1 do
6:
for j ← i + 1 to n do
7:
if Cj is merged then
8:
continue
9:
end if
\triangleright  Step 1: Boundary pairs below distance ρd
10:
B ← FindBoundaryPairs(Ci , Cj , ρd )
11:
if |B| < 3 then
\triangleright  Not enough boundary points
12:
continue
13:
end if
\triangleright  Step 2: Normal similarity and curvature
14:
normalOK ← CheckNormalSimilarity(B, ρn )
15:
curvOK ← CheckCurvature(B, ρc )
16:
if not (normalOK ∧ curvOK ) then
17:
continue
18:
end if
\triangleright  Step 3: Inner point verification
19:
pin
i ← SelectInnerPoint(Ci )
20:
pin
j ← SelectInnerPoint(Cj )
in
21:
if not VerifyMerge(pin
i , pj , ρin,n , ρin,c ) then
22:
continue
23:
end if
\triangleright  Step 4: Merge Cj into Ci
24:
Ci ← Ci ∪ Cj
25:
Clear Cj ; Mark Cj as merged
26:
end for
27:
end for
28: until no more merges can be made
29: \triangleright  Remove empty clusters
30: Remove all Ck where Ck = ∅
′
}
31: return {C1′ , . . . , Cm

where s ∈ {+, −} indicates the normal direction (inward or
outward), v̂ and u are the direction and offset of the symmetric
axis, respectively. To account for this ambiguity, a log-sum-exp
smoothing function is applied:

geometric difference under good initial condition. Specifically,

  f_i := -\tfrac {1}{t} \ln \left ( \sum _s \exp \Big (-t\,\|\epsilon _i^s\|_2^2\Big ) \right )

  &d_{ij}^{\mathrm {P2L}}(T_A, T_B) := d(\v p^A_i, \hat {\v n}^A_i, \v p^B_j, \hat {\v n}^B_j, \m T^A, \m T^B) \\ \nonumber &= \bigl \| \m R^A \hat {\v l}_i^{A} \cdot m_{ij}(\m T^A, \m T^B) \bigr \|_2^2 + \bigl \| \m R^B \hat {\v l}_j^{B} \cdot m_{ij}(\m T^A, \m T^B) \bigr \|_2^2 \\ \nonumber &+ \bigl \| \m R^A \hat {\v n}_i^{A} \cdot m_{ij}(\m T^A, \m T^B) \bigr \|_2^2 + \bigl \|\m R^B \hat {\v n}_j^{B} \cdot m_{ij}(\m T^A, \m T^B) \bigr \|_2^2

This distinction resolves the local minima caused by simple
geometric characteristic of ceramic broken sherds. Because it
ensures that the fracture surface normal is orthogonal to the
local surface geometry of the fracture edge, aiding in alignment
accuracy during optimization, as shown in Fig. 9 in main paper.

  e_{ij}(T_A,\,T_B) ~:=~ \bigl \|\, R_A\,\hat {n}_i^{A} ~-~ R_B\,\hat {n}_j^{B} \bigr \|_2^2 \eqlabel {eq:norm}

(13)

Equation (13) ensures the surface normals of the two sherds
remain consistent when they are matched.
Individual cost function.
  J_{I}(A) := \mu \!\!\sum _{i\in \Omega _{A}}\!\!\rho _{f}\big (f_{i}^{2}(\m T^A)\big ) + \nu \!\!\sum _{i\in \Psi _{A}}\!\!\rho _{g}\big (g_{i}^{2}(\m T^A,r^{\mathrm {rim}},h^{\mathrm {rim}})\big ) \eqlabel {eq:J_I}
(14)
where ΩA is the set of points used for axis alignment,
and ΨA is the set of rim points (e.g., the top edge of the
pottery). µ and ν is a positive scalar that balance the weight
of the axis alignment term and the rim-consistency term,
respectively, both of which we set to 0.4 in our experiments.  f_i 
aligns each sherd to the global symmetry axis, extending the
geometric error approach proposed by Cao and Mumford [1]
and further developed in PotSAC [7]. This method robustly
handles the normal sign ambiguity for inner and outer surfaces
by considering both inward and outward normals. Specifically,
the deviation of the curvature center from the symmetry axis
can be measured as:
  &\epsilon _i^s(\v u, \hat {\v v}) := \bigl (c_i^s(\v u, \hat {\v v}) - \v u\bigr ) \times \hat {\v v} \\ \nonumber & c_i^s(\v u, \hat {\v v}) := \v p_i - \frac {\| (\v p_i - \v u) \times \hat {\v v}\|_2}{\|\hat {\v v}\times \hat {\v n}_i^s \|_2}\hat {\v n}_i^s

(16)

where  \|\epsilon _i^+\|^2  and  \|\epsilon _i^-\|^2  represent the squared deviations
for inward and outward normals, respectively. This approach
ensures robust alignment of sherds to the global symmetry
axis, even in cases where the normal directions are flipped.
The rim-consistency term gi enforces that the points belonging to the rim adhere to rim constraints. Specifically,

where l̂A
i denotes the fracture surface normal of the edge line
on sherd A. To clarify, the fracture surface normal (\protect \hat  {\v l}_i ) of an
edge line point is distinct from its the surface normal ( \protect \hat  {\v n}_i ).
  g_i(\m T^A,r^{\mathrm {rim}},h^{\mathrm {rim}}) = &\bigl \|\,r^{\mathrm {rim}}-r\bigl (R^A\,p_i^{A} + t^A\bigr )\bigr \|_2^2 \notag \\ &+\bigl \|\,h^{\mathrm {rim}}-h\bigl (R^A\,p_i^{A} + t^A\bigr )\bigr \|_2^2 \label {eq:rim_function}
Specifically, the fracture surface normal (\protect \hat  {\v l}_i ) is a normalized
(17)
vector orthogonal to the local fracture surface of the edge
line point \ensuremath {\mathbf {p}}_i . It can be computed by taking the cross product
rim
and hrim are radius and height of rim based on
between the point’s surface normal ( \protect \hat  {\v n}_i ) and the tangent vector: where r
axis of symmetric, computed as the median value of all rim
points. The function r(p) and h(p) compute radius and height
  \hat {\v l}_i^{A} ~:=~ \frac { \hat {\v n}_i^{A} \,\times \, \bigl (\v p_{i+1}^{A} - \v p_i^{A}\bigr ) }{ \bigl \| \hat {\v n}_i^{A} \,\times \, \bigl (\v p_{i+1}^{A} - \v p_i^{A}\bigr ) \bigr \|_2 } \eqlabel {fracture_surface_normal}
(12) of p, respectively. This constraints ensures that all rim points
lie on the same circular lip after transformation.

21

Algorithm 2 Algorithm for checking overlaps
Inputs: Edge lines for sherds A ({pA }) and B ({pB })
1: Find a set of correspondence index set ΩAB between {pA }
and {pB }
2: Select a region (i.e. a range of correspondence pairs) to
test potential overlap between the two edge lines based on
one of two conditions (∗ ) listed in Sec. III.
B
AB
) in the
3: for each correspondence pair ((pA
i , pj ) ∈ Ω
investigated region do
B
4:
if (pA
i , pj ) satisfies at least one of the two conditions
†
( ) then
B
5:
Area of overlap Soverlap ← Soverlap + pA
j − pj 2
6:
end if
7: end for
Outputs: Area of overlap

Front view

Side view

Fig. 1. An example of the radial overlap case (which is false and thus
discarded) from Sec. III. Red line denotes the overlapped region.

Algorithm 3 Checking the consistency of the profile curve
1: Inputs: edge line points ({p}) across matched sherds
2: result ← true
(a) Correct configuration
(b) Incorrect case detected by the
profile curve test
3: Align the edge points {p} to the axis of symmetry (z + is
now in the axis direction)
Fig. 2. The left side of (a) and (b) show the edge lines of matched sherds,
4: Compute the radii of edge line points ({r}) from the axis- and the right side of (a) and (b) show the corresponding profile curves (with
locally fitted lines in green). In (b), the overlap test fails to find a false positive
aligned x and y coordinate values.
configuration but the profile curve test detects it.
5: Sort edge line points in ascending order of z values.
6: Segment line points {p} into bins every w (7 mm) in z.
7: for each bin of line points do

8:
Fit a line using orthogonal regression.
B
partially embedded inside another l̂A
j · l̂j > 0 . This occurs
9:
Compute standard deviation (σ) of orthogonal distance
when one piece is almost submerged into another piece. Second,
errors between the line of best fit and the edge line points.
when two fragments overlap in an unexpected manner l̂A
j ·

10:
if σ > δd then
B
B
A
A
and
l̂
·(p
−p
)
>
0
.
This
occurs
when
two
(pB
−p
)
<
0
j
j
j
j
j
11:
result ← fail
pieces match as expected but with some overlaps. If the total
12:
break
overlapped area Soverlap exceeds 50mm2 , the pair is discarded
13:
end if
from the match list.
14: end for
15: Output: result
Checking the profile curve. However, overlap checking
alone cannot eliminate all false positive matches, necessitating
an additional profile curve consistency verification step. The
III. A PPENDIX C - G EOMETRIC VERIFICATION
profile curve represents the projection of the pot’s edge onto the
To ensure the accurate reassembly of pottery fragments, it is rz-plane, reflecting its axial symmetry. A correctly assembled
essential to verify whether the edge lines of the fragments align pot should exhibit a continuous, smooth profile curve. To
correctly. This process involves two key steps: overlap check- evaluate this, the edge points are first aligned to the symmetry
ing (Algorithm 2) and profile curve consistency verification axis, and their radial distances are computed. The points are
then segmented into bins at 7mm intervals along the z-axis, and
(Algorithm 3).
Checking potential overlaps. The overlap check identifies within each bin, a line is fitted using orthogonal regression. The
corresponding edge points between two fragments and evaluates standard deviation of the orthogonal distance errors between
their potential overlap in 3D space. The two conditions with the fitted line and the actual edge points is then measured. If
asterisks (*) in Algorithm 2 are designed to select the potential this deviation exceeds a predefined threshold 7mm, the match
is deemed inconsistent and rejected.
overlapping regions:
1)

B
pA
j − pj 2 < d

B
2) nA
j · nj > 0 and

B
(pA
j −pj )
A
B ∥ · nj
∥pA
−p
j
j 2

> cos θ

The first condition filters out candidate points by measuring
their Euclidean distance, ensuring that only closely aligned
points are considered. The second condition examines the
possible overlapping alongside the radial direction as shown
in Fig 1. Once the region of interest is detected, we further
verify additional conditions (†). First, whether one fragment is

By integrating both verification methods, the algorithm
effectively reduces errors that may arise from purely distancebased matching. Fig. 1 illustrates an example of a detected
radial overlap, while Fig. 2 demonstrates a case where the
overlap test fails to identify a false positive configuration,
but the profile curve consistency check successfully detects
the mismatch. The combination of these two algorithms
significantly enhances the reliability and accuracy of pottery
fragment reassembly.

22

TABLE II
PARAMETERS USED IN GEOMETRIC VERIFICATION .
Parameter
d
θ
Soverlap
ω
δd

Value
5mm
30◦
50mm2
7mm
7mm

Description
Distance threshold
Overlapping direction threshold
Total overlapped area
Interval along the z-axis (bin)
Orthogonal distance error threshold

IV. A PPENDIX D - A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL
VISUALIZATION OF REASSEMBLY

We present a visual comparison of reassembly results
corresponding to the quantitative evaluations in Tables V
and VI in the main paper [44]. Fig. 3 and 4 show pottery
reassembled using different methods, including Jigsaw [22],
FRASIER [15], PuzzleFusion++ [39], and our proposed SfS++
(with k = 5, b = 3). Each row depicts a pot reconstructed
from 2 to 20 fragments, aligning with the fragment range
used during training for deep learning-based models. The first
column provides ground truth models for reference, while the
last column presents the results of our method, demonstrating
improved reassembly quality over existing approaches.

23

Pot A

Pot B

Pot C

Pot F

Pot G

Pot H

Pot J

Ground Truth

Jigsaw

FRASIER

PuzzleFusion++

SFS++ (Ours)

Fig. 3. Comparison of visualized results from different models on our dataset. Each row represents a reassembly result for pots with 2 to 20 pieces, as this
range reflects the data used during training for deep learning models. The last column shows our method (SfS++ with k = 5 and b = 3), demonstrating
improved reassembly quality compared to other models like Jigsaw, FRASIER, and PuzzleFusion++. Ground truth models are provided for reference in the first
column.

24

Plate 1

Plate 2

Plate 3

Bowl 1

Bowl 2

Bowl 3

Vase 1

Vase 2

Vase 3

Ground Truth

Jigsaw

FRASIER

PuzzleFusion++

SFS++ (Ours)

Fig. 4. Comparison of visualized results from different models on Breaking bad dataset. Each row represents a reassembly result for pots with 2 to 20 pieces,
as this range reflects the data used during training for deep learning models. The last column shows our method (SfS++ with k = 5 and b = 3), demonstrating
improved reassembly quality compared to other models like Jigsaw, FRASIER, and PuzzleFusion++. Ground truth models are provided for reference in the first
column.

